i can and i will, though i’m not fond of sewing. there’s nothing the child can’t do. the excellent papa labored under the delusion that he was, and reveled in long discussions with the kindred spirit, till a chance remark of his more observing grandson suddenly enlightened him. the garden had to be put in order, and each sister had a quarter of the little plot to do what she liked with. march gratefully, as her eyes went from her husband’s letter to beth’s smiling face, and her hand caressed the brooch made of gray and golden, chestnut and dark brown hair, which the girls had just fastened on her breast. a. “my john wouldn’t marry for money, any more than i would. ” “don’t be sorry, i won’t let it hurt me. the bag is opened, and several quarts of tin money shower down upon the stage till it is quite glorified with the glitter. she was very glad when it was all over and she was quiet in her bed, where she could think and wonder and fume till her head ached and her hot cheeks were cooled by a few natural tears. jo liked this, and after an energetic rummage from garret to cellar, subsided on the sofa to nurse her cold with arsenicum and books. “it’s very good,” said amy critically. s. when they were done we threw down some flowers, and saw them scramble for them, kiss their hands to the invisible ladies, and go laughing away, to smoke and drink beer, i suppose. march said to the girls, who were all busied about her, one folding her shawl, another smoothing out the strings of her bonnet, a third putting on her overshoes, and a fourth fastening up her travelling bag. “i may get into a scrape for telling, but i didn’t promise not to, so i will, for i never feel easy in my mind till i’ve told you any plummy bit of news i get. poor jo, how she did glorify that plain man, as she sat knitting away so quietly, yet letting nothing escape her, not even the fact that mr. then it was that jo, living in the darkened room, with that suffering little sister always before her eyes and that pathetic voice sounding in her ears, learned to see the beauty and the sweetness of beth’s nature, to feel how deep and tender a place she filled in all hearts, and to acknowledge the worth of beth’s unselfish ambition to live for others, and make home happy by that exercise of those simple virtues which all may possess, and which all should love and value more than talent, wealth, or beauty. “if you told him to stay up there, and go to sleep alone, make him do it, or he will never learn to mind you. men are so helpless, mother,” said amy, with a matronly air, which delighted her husband. don’t shut yourself up in a bandbox because you are a woman, but understand what is going on, and educate yourself to take your part in the world’s work, for it all affects you and yours. “what do you hear from your mother?” asked the old lady gruffly. the day in richmond park was charming, for we had a regular english picnic, and i had more splendid oaks and groups of deer than i could copy, also heard a nightingale, and saw larks go up. his last whim had been to bring with him on his weekly visits some new, useful, and ingenious article for the young housekeeper. “how can i, when the mere idea of you, married and settled, is so irresistibly funny that i can’t keep sober!” answered jo, smiling all over her face, so infectiously that they had another laugh, and then settled down for a good talk, quite in the pleasant old fashion. i came here to moralize, not to hear things that make me skip to think of. “how happy those children seem together!” observed mr. ” returned jo, leaning over the gate to watch for laurie. ” “yes, mother, i’m sure of that,” said meg, listening respectfully to the little lecture, for the best of women will hold forth upon the all absorbing subject of house keeping. poor dear, just wait till i make my fortune, and you shall revel in carriages and ice cream and high-heeled slippers, and posies, and red-headed boys to dance with. i never thought of being married, as you all did. grief is the best opener of some hearts, and jo’s was nearly ready for the bag. ” there beth’s voice gave way, and clinging to her sister, she cried so despairingly that jo was frightened. i don’t intend to gad about with you, but leave you free to go where you like, while i amuse myself in my own way. aunt woke up and, being more good-natured after her nap, told me to read a bit and show what frivolous work i preferred to the worthy and instructive belsham. hummel goes away to work, and lottchen takes care of it. ” “i can’t love anyone else, and i’ll never forget you, jo, never! never!” with a stamp to emphasize his passionate words. she spoke briskly, but in her secret soul she wished she had said nothing about tuesday, for her interest like her cake was getting a little stale. meg, beth, and amy were sitting together, late in the afternoon, when jo burst into the room, looking excited and demanding breathlessly, “has anyone taken my book?” meg and beth said, “no. you begin at the other end, meg, dear, but the lessons you learn now will be of use to you by-and-by when john is a richer man, for the mistress of a house, however splendid, should know how work ought to be done, if she wishes to be well and honestly served. ” “yes, i spent a month there and then joined him in paris, where he has settled for the winter. as she was a womanly little woman, the maternal instinct was very strong, and she was entirely absorbed in her children, to the utter exclusion of everything and everybody else. march, feeling that he had got a kindred spirit, opened his choicest stores for his guest’s benefit, while silent john listened and enjoyed the talk, but said not a word, and mr. it is a world of disappointments, as john discovered when he reached the dovecote. “i’d do it again tomorrow, if i could. i can’t stop here, for the house is full. “please let me kiss him once, john?” “certainly. he consents without a murmur, all join in a joyful chorus, and the curtain falls upon the lovers kneeling to receive don pedro’s blessing in attitudes of the most romantic grace. “i can’t do it. ” “dear me, how romantic!” exclaimed meg. i am to have my meals with the children, if i prefer it to the great table, and for the present i do, for i am bashful, though no one will believe it. brooke vanished into the study. i asked for splendid things, to be sure, but in my heart i knew i should be satisfied, if i had a little home, and john, and some dear children like these. i really feel like a dissipated london fine lady, writing here so late, with my room full of pretty things, and my head a jumble of parks, theaters, new gowns, and gallant creatures who say “ah!” and twirl their blond mustaches with the true english lordliness. ” but jo was mistaken, for laurie came prancing in, overflowing with good spirits, bearing a great bridal-looking bouquet for ‘mrs. boys are trying enough to human patience, goodness knows, but girls are infinitely more so, especially to nervous gentlemen with tyrannical tempers and no more talent for teaching than dr. “his grandpa does not know what’s good for him, and keeps him shut up all alone. carrol had got english notions about chaperons and such nonsense, and wouldn’t let amy come with us. she knew where it was, was free to take what she liked, and all he asked was that she should keep account of every penny, pay bills once a month, and remember that she was a poor man’s wife. “don’t take all. if they haven’t, it’s a pleasure to comfort the poor souls, and keep them from despair when they find it out. laurence,” and laurie paused, for amy’s eyes had an absent look, though fixed upon his face. meg, who went shopping in the afternoon and got a ‘sweet blue muslin’, had discovered, after she had cut the breadths off, that it wouldn’t wash, which mishap made her slightly cross. “because, what?” “you won’t tell?” “never!” “well, i have a bad trick of standing before the fire, and so i burn my frocks, and i scorched this one, and though it’s nicely mended, it shows, and meg told me to keep still so no one would see it. please remember that there is always a welcome waiting for you over the way. he brought the flowers himself, and i should have asked him in, if i had been sure what was going on upstairs. miss meg is going to make a proper good housekeeper. “it’s a very good one for you,” retorted jo in a low voice. “let marmee think we are getting things for ourselves, and then surprise her. meg stopped lecturing, and lighted the lamp, amy got out of the easy chair without being asked, and jo forgot how tired she was as she sat up to hold the slippers nearer to the blaze. “brooke is commander in chief, i am commissary general, the other fellows are staff officers, and you, ladies, are company. “what color do you like best?” “brown, that is, sometimes. “you will sing with me? we go excellently well together. amy was drawing the lovers, who sat apart in a beautiful world of their own, the light of which touched their faces with a grace the little artist could not copy. he knew vevay well, and as soon as the boat touched the little quay, he hurried along the shore to la tour, where the carrols were living en pension. beth is my conscience, and i can’t give her up. i’ve had a bad cold, and been shut up a week. ” chapter seven amy’s valley of humiliation “that boy is a perfect cyclops, isn’t he?” said amy one day, as laurie clattered by on horseback, with a flourish of his whip as he passed. she makes a good living out of such stories, they say. raphael’s face was found boldly executed on the underside of the moulding board, and bacchus on the head of a beer barrel. “silence a la mort,” replied laurie, with a melodramatic flourish, as he went away. but recollecting how nearly he had lost her, he held her close, saying tenderly, with her cheek against his own, “i’ve got you safe, my beth, and i’ll keep you so, please god. “so do i, it was so smooth and pretty. as for buttons, she soon learned to wonder where they went, to shake her head over the carelessness of men, and to threaten to make him sew them on himself, and see if his work would stand impatient and clumsy fingers any better than hers. there was a momentary lull, broken by hannah, who stalked in, laid two hot turnovers on the table, and stalked out again. bhaer. ” “really, mother? where are our bundles?” asked amy, who was a very literal young lady. as she sat with the paper folded between her hands, the charred log fell asunder. i’m glad you think he is only beginning to care for me. the invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions. when she saw the young gentleman she looked anything but pleased, and passed him with a nod. but i don’t want to play, or sing, or say anything. the others sat round the fire, talking away, utterly regardless of the lapse of time, till meg, whose maternal mind was impressed with a firm conviction that daisy had tumbled out of bed, and demi set his nightgown afire studying the structure of matches, made a move to go. like most young scribblers, she went abroad for her characters and scenery, and banditti, counts, gypsies, nuns, and duchesses appeared upon her stage, and played their parts with as much accuracy and spirit as could be expected. ” “he won’t stay there, he never does unless i sit by him. moffat to her husband, as they drove away. mrs. ” “i’ve been shaken, and i won’t bear it!” growled laurie indignantly. “i’m glad of that, he is so lonely. laurence, rubbing up his hair till it looked as if he had been out in a gale, and smoothing the frown from his brow with an air of relief. ” meg rose as she spoke, and was just going to rehearse the dignified exit, when a step in the hall made her fly into her seat and begin to sew as fast as if her life depended on finishing that particular seam in a given time. laurie and she were always making signs to one another, and talking about ‘spread eagles’ till the girls declared they had both lost their wits. keeping that warning carefully in mind, margaret got safely down stairs and sailed into the drawing rooms where the moffats and a few early guests were assembled. he seldom spoke to laurie, but he looked at him often, and a shadow would pass across his face, as if regretting his own lost youth, as he watched the young man in his prime. if he has, after all your kindness to him, i’ll thrash him with my own hands. ” “she was kind, but not in the right way, and it’s lucky for her she didn’t love me, if i’m the good-for-nothing fellow you think me. “brooke? that boy’s tutor? ah! i understand now. “jo talks about the country where we hope to live sometime—the real country, she means, with pigs and chickens and haymaking. no little affectations marred it, and the cordial sweetness of her manner was more charming than the new beauty or the old grace, for it stamped her at once with the unmistakable sign of the true gentlewoman she had hoped to become. i did my very best, and she liked it, though she only said. i think it very appropriate to you, and feel very grateful for your efforts to make it so pretty, but we must give up our private wishes, of course, and i will see that you have a good place elsewhere. if jo had not been otherwise engaged, laurie’s behavior would have amused her, for a faint twinge, not of jealousy, but something like suspicion, caused that gentleman to stand aloof at first, and observe the newcomer with brotherly circumspection. she tried to rush forward, but her feet seemed to have no strength in them, and for a second, she could only stand motionless, staring with a terror-stricken face at the little blue hood above the black water. “margaret. ” “it’s a bargain, and we shall get the best of it!” so the young pair shook hands upon it, and then paced happily on again, feeling that their pleasant home was more homelike because they hoped to brighten other homes, believing that their own feet would walk more uprightly along the flowery path before them, if they smoothed rough ways for other feet, and feeling that their hearts were more closely knit together by a love which could tenderly remember those less blest than they. i didn’t mind, for i like ‘to see folks eat with a relish’, as hannah says, and the poor man must have needed a deal of food after teaching idiots all day. brooke, breaking an awkward pause. well, if it does him good, i’m glad, if it makes him hate me, i’m sorry, but it’s true, and i can’t take back a word of it. there’s someone ready and glad to go with you, anywhere in the world. i haven’t time to write much, and that will do just as well. she was obliged to walk carefully, for she had on high-heeled shoes, and, as laurie told jo afterward, it was a comical sight to see her mince along in her gay suit, with polly sidling and bridling just behind her, imitating her as well as he could, and occasionally stopping to laugh or exclaim, “ain’t we fine? get along, you fright! hold your tongue! kiss me, dear! ha! ha!” having with difficulty restrained an explosion of merriment, lest it should offend her majesty, laurie tapped and was graciously received. “take a good look at it for her sake, and then come and tell me what you have been doing with yourself all this while,” said amy, seating herself, ready for a good talk. chapter forty-four my lord and lady “please, madam mother, could you lend me my wife for half an hour? the luggage has come, and i’ve been making hay of amy’s paris finery, trying to find some things i want,” said laurie, coming in the next day to find mrs. ” “i look as if i needed it, don’t i?” said laurie, getting up and striking an attitude which suddenly changed from the imposing to the rapturous, as amy’s voice was heard calling, “where is she? where’s my dear old jo?” in trooped the whole family, and everyone was hugged and kissed all over again, and after several vain attempts, the three wanderers were set down to be looked at and exulted over. every room in the big house was soon full. you always make yourself nice for table, no matter how tired you are, so why shouldn’t i when i have the time?” “i do it out of respect for you, my dear,” said old-fashioned john. to be admired, loved, and respected. the wound persisted in healing with a rapidity that astonished him, and instead of trying to forget, he found himself trying to remember. if you have plagued him, he’s sober and walks slowly, as if he wanted to go back and do his work better. jo saw her color rise and was down upon her in a minute. the more she saw of annie moffat’s pretty things, the more she envied her and sighed to be rich. mamma was an abject slave to their caprices, but papa was not so easily subjugated, and occasionally afflicted his tender spouse by an attempt at paternal discipline with his obstreperous son. i dislike mr. i only let her go. “once on a time, a knight went out into the world to seek his fortune, for he had nothing but his sword and his shield. “i can’t say ‘yes’ truly, so i won’t say it at all. “amy, we must go. how blithely she sang that evening, and how they all laughed at her because she woke amy in the night by playing the piano on her face in her sleep. 2. how did you make the boys stop calling you dora?” “i thrashed ’em. ” laurie turned the matter over in his mind so often that he soon brought himself to confess that he had been selfish and lazy, but then when a man has a great sorrow, he should be indulged in all sorts of vagaries till he has lived it down. it seemed quite fairylike to jo, as she went up and down the walks, enjoying the blooming walls on either side, the soft light, the damp sweet air, and the wonderful vines and trees that hung about her, while her new friend cut the finest flowers till his hands were full. title: little women author: louisa may alcott release date: may 1, 1996 [ebook #514] most recently updated: november 4, 2022 language: english *** start of the project gutenberg ebook little women *** little women by louisa may alcott contents part 1 chapter one playing pilgrims chapter two a merry christmas chapter three the laurence boy chapter four burdens chapter five being neighborly chapter six beth finds the palace beautiful chapter seven amy’s valley of humiliation chapter eight jo meets apollyon chapter nine meg goes to vanity fair chapter ten the p. “no matter whether she heard or not, let her take care of herself. there you go!” returned fred, croqueting her ball far away. poor father took to his books, after i had refused all offers of help, and left me to try my experiment alone. his first wooing had been of the tempestuous order, and he looked back upon it as if through a long vista of years with a feeling of compassion blended with regret. “if i were you, i’d write him an apology, sir. “if god spares beth, i’ll try to love and serve him all my life,” answered jo, with equal fervor. yours is as good as new, but i forgot the burn and the tear in mine. james laurence is a crotchety old fellow and not to be depended on. but it will soon grow out again,” said beth, coming to kiss and comfort the shorn sheep. old mr. she did neither, but she remembered the scene, and gave the professor her heartiest respect, for she knew it cost him an effort to speak out then and there, because his conscience would not let him be silent. laurie was a young lover, but he was in earnest, and meant to ‘have it out’, if he died in the attempt, so he plunged into the subject with characteristic impetuousity, saying in a voice that would get choky now and then, in spite of manful efforts to keep it steady. frank, sitting just behind the little girls, heard what they were saying, and pushed his crutch away from him with an impatient gesture as he watched the active lads going through all sorts of comical gymnastics. mr. ” “hospitable creature! i know it. “did you ever see such a den, my dear? just come and help me put these books to rights, for i’ve turned everything upside down, trying to discover what he has done with the six new handkerchiefs i gave him not long ago. aunt’s pronunciation is old-fashioned, and flo and i, though we flattered ourselves that we knew a good deal, find we don’t, and are very grateful to have fred do the ‘_parley vooing_’, as uncle calls it. i shall be better soon. i don’t mean to waste your money, and i didn’t think those little things would count up so. i haven’t words beautiful enough to describe it. you know it’s impossible for people to make themselves love other people if they don’t,” cried jo inelegantly but remorsefully, as she softly patted his shoulder, remembering the time when he had comforted her so long ago. i’m the only one here who likes sweet things, and it will mold before i can dispose of it,” answered amy, thinking with a sigh of the generous store she had laid in for such an end as this. his very boots were benevolent, and his collars never stiff and raspy like other people’s. nothing was said, and i hoped he wouldn’t find it out, but one day last week he caught me at it. “then i am satisfied. “how did you learn to keep still? that is what troubles me, for the sharp words fly out before i know what i’m about, and the more i say the worse i get, till it’s a pleasure to hurt people’s feelings and say dreadful things. laurence was continually finding some touching case of destitution, and begging the bhaers to take pity on the child, and he would gladly pay a trifle for its support. “i think not, for i might see something sad, and everyone looks so happy now, i don’t believe they could be much improved. she dried her tears quickly, restrained her impatience to see her mother, and never even thought of the turquoise ring, when the old lady heartily agreed in laurie’s opinion, that she behaved ‘like a capital little woman’. bangs came that morning, he looked long at beth, held the hot hand in both his own for a minute, and laid it gently down, saying, in a low voice to hannah, “if mrs. a little more sunshine to ripen the nut, then, not a boy’s impatient shake, but a man’s hand reached up to pick it gently from the burr, and find the kernal sound and sweet. she had her doubts about it from the beginning, for her lively fancy and girlish romance felt as ill at ease in the new style as she would have done masquerading in the stiff and cumbrous costume of the last century. “‘heart’s-ease is my favorite flower, and these will always remind me of the gentle giver. “ah, yes, i hear these naughty ones go to vex you, mees marsch. “oh, he was a little man who looked as if he merely lived to oil his hair. don’t care if i do. do, do!” not until months afterward did jo understand how she had the strength of mind to hold fast to the resolution she had made when she decided that she did not love her boy, and never could. it’s like a man to propose a bone and vulgar bread and cheese for company. a flank movement produced an unconditional surrender, however, for laurie knew where to have him. you mustn’t talk in that way, and laurie mustn’t take your bad advice. nor did meg miss any of the romance from the daily parting, when her husband followed up his kiss with the tender inquiry, “shall i send some veal or mutton for dinner, darling?” the little house ceased to be a glorified bower, but it became a home, and the young couple soon felt that it was a change for the better. she was in a sad state when she got home, and when the older girls arrived, some time later, an indignation meeting was held at once. “goodness only knows. the girls meantime spread the table, set the children round the fire, and fed them like so many hungry birds, laughing, talking, and trying to understand the funny broken english. jo went prepared to bow down and adore the mighty ones whom she had worshiped with youthful enthusiasm afar off. make the shroud, and lay him in my box, and after the dinner party, we’ll have a nice little funeral,” said jo, beginning to feel as if she had undertaken a good deal. oh, pip! oh, pip! how could i be so cruel to you?” cried beth, taking the poor thing in her hands and trying to restore him. she’d never forgive us if beth. as john firmly believed that ‘my wife’ was equal to anything, and took a natural pride in her skill, he resolved that she should be gratified, and their only crop of fruit laid by in a most pleasing form for winter use. “i’m not quiet and nice, but i’ll come, if mother will let me. “good! then i shall rest happy, and be sure that thou givest me all. jo, dear, we all have our temptations, some far greater than yours, and it often takes us all our lives to conquer them. you’ve had a great deal to bear, and had to bear it all alone. bhaer looking and laughing quietly, while he made signs to tina not to betray him. ” “oh, my tongue, my abominable tongue! why can’t i learn to keep it quiet?” groaned jo, remembering words which had been her undoing. i advise you to learn, for german is a valuable accomplishment to teachers. “here are your flowers. ” being an energetic individual, mr. meg, just swing that out of the front window, and it will rouse the neighborhood in a jiffy. “i knew you’d hurt your feet with those silly shoes. ” “you know something about it, and you’d better tell at once, or i’ll make you. going in to exult over a fallen enemy and to praise a strong-minded sister for the banishment of an objectionable lover, it certainly was a shock to behold the aforesaid enemy serenely sitting on the sofa, with the strongminded sister enthroned upon his knee and wearing an expression of the most abject submission. it’s the plague of my life and i was a goose to wear it. ” “he ought to trust me, and not act as if i was a baby. carrol, florence’s mamma, was ordered to buy, have made, and marked a generous supply of house and table linen, and send it as her present, all of which was faithfully done, but the secret leaked out, and was greatly enjoyed by the family, for aunt march tried to look utterly unconscious, and insisted that she could give nothing but the old-fashioned pearls long promised to the first bride. he said it was dead, and looked at heinrich and minna, who have sore throats. ” and amy laid another sketch beside the one he held. next week we are off to germany and switzerland, and as we shall travel fast, i shall only be able to give you hasty letters. i’d rather not. it was all fair weather in her world, and every morning she scrambled up to the window in her little nightgown to look out, and say, no matter whether it rained or shone, “oh, pitty day, oh, pitty day!” everyone was a friend, and she offered kisses to a stranger so confidingly that the most inveterate bachelor relented, and baby-lovers became faithful worshipers. the trip was like riding through a long picture gallery, full of lovely landscapes. “it does seem pleasant to be quiet, and not have company manners on all the time. meek, mouse-colored donkeys, laden with panniers of freshly cut grass passed by, with a pretty girl in a capaline sitting between the green piles, or an old woman spinning with a distaff as she went. later in the evening, when his mind had been set at rest about the bootjack, laurie said suddenly to his wife, “mrs. he was not ashamed of it, but put it away as one of the bitter-sweet experiences of his life, for which he could be grateful when the pain was over. jo thought, as she watched the pair, “how well they look together! i was right, and laurie has found the beautiful, accomplished girl who will become his home better than clumsy old jo, and be a pride, not a torment to him. ) “these girls were anxious to be good and made many excellent resolutions, but they did not keep them very well, and were constantly saying, ‘if only we had this,’ or ‘if we could only do that,’ quite forgetting how much they already had, and how many things they actually could do. for demi inherited a trifle of his sire’s firmness of character, we won’t call it obstinacy, and when he made up his little mind to have or to do anything, all the king’s horses and all the king’s men could not change that pertinacious little mind. e. i see so many going to ruin for want of help at the right minute, i love so to do anything for them, i seem to feel their wants, and sympathize with their troubles, and oh, i should so like to be a mother to them!” mrs. amy likewise bore up stoutly till the steamer sailed. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the united states and you are located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg are removed. “have you anything decent, jo?” “scarlet and gray boating suit, good enough for me. “thank you, that sounds pleasant,” began mr. “this unassuming style promotes study, that’s why we adopt it,” returned laurie, who certainly could not be accused of vanity, having voluntarily sacrificed a handsome curly crop to the demand for quarter-inch-long stubble. will you be a little dorcas, going about emptying a big basket of comforts, and filling it up with good deeds?” “with all my heart, if you will be a brave st. i’ve tried and failed, and i won’t risk our happiness by such a serious experiment. how will you have me, full length or three-quarters, on my head or my heels? i should respectfully suggest a recumbent posture, then put yourself in also and call it ‘dolce far niente’. ” “don’t you read?” “not much. ” jo’s sudden change of tone made the girls laugh, but all looked rather anxious, and no one said a word as snodgrass took his seat. she didn’t care to be a queen of society now half so much as she did to be a lovable woman. “of course i am!” cried meg, smoothing the silvery folds of her first silk dress, for mr. she was right. “jo, please. his love and care never tire or change, can never be taken from you, but may become the source of lifelong peace, happiness, and strength. now, miss sallie, you shall have a chance without waiting to draw. it’s gay there, and i’ll enjoy myself after the troubles. “what shall you wear?” asked sallie. if monsieur would give himself the pain of sitting down, a flash of time should present her. i wish i’d let my hair alone,” cried meg petulantly. she did not like it, but the impulse that made her turn it over was not one of displeasure but fear, because for a minute she fancied the paper was the volcano. “have games till it’s cooler. “tucked away out of sight, i dare say,” thought jo, who could forgive her own wrongs, but hotly resented any insult offered her family. i know he wanted to speak, but i think, from something he once hinted, that he had promised his father not to do anything of the sort yet a while, for he is a rash boy, and the old gentleman dreads a foreign daughter-in-law. he shall have the best of everything. amy was taken possession of by mrs. “i just will, though, for it’s capital, so shady, light, and big. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. i promise never to hop very far, if that is any comfort to you. “come, jo, don’t desert a fellow. how funny!” cried jo, taking one up. the next minute her face fell as she glanced about the empty room, adding, with an involuntary sigh, “yes, i am glad, but how i shall miss him. “you have only made the mistake that most young wives make—forgotten your duty to your husband in your love for your children. “good! bless you! now, as there’s nothing like ‘taking time by the fetlock’, as winkle characteristically observes, allow me to present the new member. grundy, and help her sister through what she regarded as ‘a nonsensical business’. “no, i wouldn’t, for the smart caps won’t match the plain gowns without any trimming on them. snodgrass, who was tilting back in his chair, till he arranged himself properly, began to read: “the pickwick portfolio” may 20, 18— poet’s corner anniversary ode again we meet to celebrate with badge and solemn rite, our fifty-second anniversary, in pickwick hall, tonight. i do, and i mean to make the most of every chance that comes. “well, dearies, how have you got on today? there was so much to do, getting the boxes ready to go tomorrow, that i didn’t come home to dinner. “that’s evident, by the way you racket downstairs. on the thursday evening, belle shut herself up with her maid, and between them they turned meg into a fine lady. i knew it was silly, but they flattered me and said i was a beauty, and quantities of nonsense, so i let them make a fool of me. the ‘men of my class’, were heroes in the eyes of the girls, who never wearied of the exploits of ‘our fellows’, and were frequently allowed to bask in the smiles of these great creatures, when laurie brought them home with him. ” in the garret four little chests all in a row, dim with dust, and worn by time, all fashioned and filled, long ago, by children now in their prime. e. i felt sure then that something better than what you call the ‘mercenary spirit’ had come over her, and a hint here and there in her letters made me suspect that love and laurie would win the day. ” “i’m glad of it,” he answered, with a look of relief, then buttoned her gloves for her, and asked if his tie was straight, just as he used to do when they went to parties together at home. miss crocker tasted first, made a wry face, and drank some water hastily. i’ll rest till hannah comes, and then do the best i can. jo wanted to laugh, but restrained herself and said warmly, for she too, was getting excited with all this, “don’t swear, teddy! he isn’t old, nor anything bad, but good and kind, and the best friend i’ve got, next to you. ” “well—i guess i will,” said amy slowly. laurence, while enjoying. ” in spite of the new sorrow, it was a very happy time, so happy that laurie could not bear to disturb it by a word. the atmosphere of the whole house being summerlike, laurie led the way from room to room, letting jo stop to examine whatever struck her fancy. mrs. beth was worried by the confusion of her closet and the difficulty of learning three or four songs at once, and amy deeply regretted the damage done her frock, for katy brown’s party was to be the next day and now like flora mcflimsey, she had ‘nothing to wear’. so busy was she on this day that she did not hear laurie’s ring nor see his face peeping in at her as she gravely promenaded to and fro, flirting her fan and tossing her head, on which she wore a great pink turban, contrasting oddly with her blue brocade dress and yellow quilted petticoat. ‘calm, cool, and quiet’, yes, i think i can promise that. hagar, in a fine dramatic melody, promised both, and proceeded to call up the spirit who would bring the love philter. ” here meg’s partner appeared, to find her looking much flushed and rather agitated. you can’t go, amy, so don’t be a baby and whine about it. it would have been selfish to frighten you all when marmee was so anxious about meg, and amy away, and you so happy with laurie—at least i thought so then. there was the usual assortment of young men absorbed in themselves, young couples absorbed in each other, married ladies in their babies, and old gentlemen in politics. “you don’t care now, but there’ll come a time when that promise will keep you out of mischief, or i’m much mistaken. the knight in whom i’m interested went back to find the pretty face, and learned that the princesses had spun themselves free and all gone and married, but one. mrs. “nearly seventy, i believe,” answered meg, counting stitches to hide the merriment in her eyes. e. it’s too long, but omitting the passages i’ve marked will make it just the right length,” he said, in a businesslike tone. gott bless you!” and with that, he shook hands warmly, shouldered tina, and went away. there was no need of any words when they got home, for father and mother saw plainly now what they had prayed to be saved from seeing. the milkman, baker, grocer, and butcher inquired how she did, poor mrs. that night he looked as if he would like the fun of quizzing her figures and pretending to be horrified at her extravagance, as he often did, being particularly proud of his prudent wife. so did mine, but i proved to her that i had talent by taking a few lessons privately, and then she was quite willing i should go on. bhaer. march received the culprit alone. try to be sociable at the lambs’. “oh dear, we are growing up with a vengeance. “it may be vain and wrong to say it, but—i’m afraid—laurie is getting too fond of me. on being removed from this perilous situation, it was discovered that he had suffered no injury but several bruises, and we are happy to add, is now doing well. do your hair the pretty way, and put the pink rose in your bonnet. ” and he pointed to the name of mrs. i’m not one of the agreeable sort. “i never saw such a girl! you don’t know a compliment when you get it,” said meg, with the air of a young lady who knew all about the matter. it won’t do any good. brooke is, and how fortunate that mr. john was busy that month and left the bills to her, the next month he was absent, but the third he had a grand quarterly settling up, and meg never forgot it. just as the party was setting out, amy called over the banisters in a threatening tone, “you’ll be sorry for this, jo march, see if you ain’t. lennox, and when i said something about the lakes of killarney, he sighed, and sung, with a look at me. frankfurt was delightful. give my dearest love to father, and believe me, ever your own. you can do your part out west, i can do mine here, and both be happy hoping for the best, and leaving the future to be as god wills. the blanc mange was lumpy, and the strawberries not as ripe as they looked, having been skilfully ‘deaconed’. mrs. i do not think that good young girls should see such things. “if i’d known you were coming i’d have had something ready for you today, though not as pretty as this, i’m afraid. mrs. i mean what do you intend and wish to do?” “smoke a cigarette, if you’ll allow me. of course, there were many light-footed, shrill-voiced american girls, handsome, lifeless-looking english ditto, and a few plain but piquante french demoiselles, likewise the usual set of traveling young gentlemen who disported themselves gaily, while mammas of all nations lined the walls and smiled upon them benignly when they danced with their daughters. amy did not know why he looked at her so kindly, nor why he filled up her book with his own name, and devoted himself to her for the rest of the evening in the most delightful manner; but the impulse that wrought this agreeable change was the result of one of the new impressions which both of them were unconsciously giving and receiving. i like to think about them afterward, if they are real and not too preachy,” said jo, after a minute’s silence. he was staring at her with undisguised surprise, and disapproval also, she thought, for though he bowed and smiled, yet something in his honest eyes made her blush and wish she had her old dress on. ” “then why don’t you do it?” “natural depravity, i suppose. and there meg sat, to ‘rest and read’, which meant to yawn and imagine what pretty summer dresses she would get with her salary. “well, they can eat beef and bread and butter, if they are hungry, only it’s mortifying to have to spend your whole morning for nothing,” thought jo, as she rang the bell half an hour later than usual, and stood, hot, tired, and dispirited, surveying the feast spread before laurie, accustomed to all sorts of elegance, and miss crocker, whose tattling tongue would report them far and wide. so he put her up at the table, opened the great dictionary she had brought, and gave her a paper and pencil, and she scribbled away, turning a leaf now and then, and passing her little fat finger down the page, as if finding a word, so soberly that i nearly betrayed myself by a laugh, while mr. she was a housewifely little creature, and helped hannah keep home neat and comfortable for the workers, never thinking of any reward but to be loved. if you are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook. ” “much you know about it, ma’am,” said laurie in a superior tone. fighting faults isn’t easy, as i know, and a cheery word kind of gives a lift. “yes, i mean to. “little raphael,” as her sisters called her, had a decided talent for drawing, and was never so happy as when copying flowers, designing fairies, or illustrating stories with queer specimens of art. “i’ve got to stay for this confounded supper, but i shall be home early tomorrow. next our peaceful tupman comes, so rosy, plump, and sweet, who chokes with laughter at the puns, and tumbles off his seat. ” “did she own she liked it?” asked meg. i’m very proud of him and should like you to see him. “that’s very fine, i dare say, but it’s sad enough to make one cry. “i don’t understand it. march, coming in half an hour later, with an expression of placid despair. i wanted the violet silk, but there isn’t time to make it over, so i must be contented with my old tarlaton. ” and she looked as if she would like doing it in the most summary style. ” “well, she does it so imperceptibly that i don’t think i shall mind much. they were neither many nor heavy, but that made no difference to her. “hold your tongue!” cried jo, covering her ears. it seems that tina is the child of the frenchwoman who does the fine ironing in the laundry here. i felt bad and wanted you very much. we flew up, and hid behind the curtains, but sly peeps showed us fred and the students singing away down below. e. ” there was a little quiver in jo’s voice, and thinking it a good omen, laurie turned round, bringing all his persuasive powers to bear as he said, in the wheedlesome tone that had never been so dangerously wheedlesome before, “don’t disappoint us, dear! everyone expects it. both are tall fellows with whiskers, fred handsome in the english style, and frank much better, for he only limps slightly, and uses no crutches. i’ll do it by proxy, when your grandpa comes. he says he feels as if he ‘could make a prosperous voyage now with me aboard as mate, and lots of love for ballast’. g. after luncheon, the girl took them out for a walk, and i went to my needlework like little mabel ‘with a willing mind’. ” but she didn’t finish, for he looked so friendly that she forgot her speech and, only remembering that he had lost the little girl he loved, she put both arms round his neck and kissed him. i like adventures, and i’m going to find some. the first few months were very happy ones, and beth often used to look round, and say “how beautiful this is!” as they all sat together in her sunny room, the babies kicking and crowing on the floor, mother and sisters working near, and father reading, in his pleasant voice, from the wise old books which seemed rich in good and comfortable words, as applicable now as when written centuries ago, a little chapel, where a paternal priest taught his flock the hard lessons all must learn, trying to show them that hope can comfort love, and faith make resignation possible. i must look after grace, she is romping. so they agreed to stop complaining, to enjoy the blessings already possessed, and try to deserve them, lest they should be taken away entirely, instead of increased, and i believe they were never disappointed or sorry that they took the old woman’s advice. it irritated her, but she was ashamed to confess it, and now and then she tried to console herself by buying something pretty, so that sallie needn’t think she had to economize. in her secret soul, however, she decided that politics were as bad as mathematics, and that the mission of politicians seemed to be calling each other names, but she kept these feminine ideas to herself, and when john paused, shook her head and said with what she thought diplomatic ambiguity, “well, i really don’t see what we are coming to. do come and help me or i shall die!” and the exhausted housewife cast herself upon his breast, giving him a sweet welcome in every sense of the word, for her pinafore had been baptized at the same time as the floor. laurie and his friends gallantly threw themselves into the breach, bought up the bouquets, encamped before the table, and made that corner the liveliest spot in the room. “but what is father’s friend saying to make you look like a peony? there’s mischief going on, and i insist upon knowing what it is,” with another rap. often when she woke jo found beth reading in her well-worn little book, heard her singing softly, to beguile the sleepless night, or saw her lean her face upon her hands, while slow tears dropped through the transparent fingers, and jo would lie watching her with thoughts too deep for tears, feeling that beth, in her simple, unselfish way, was trying to wean herself from the dear old life, and fit herself for the life to come, by sacred words of comfort, quiet prayers, and the music she loved so well. but the novel disaster quenched her courage for a time, for public opinion is a giant which has frightened stouter-hearted jacks on bigger beanstalks than hers. so it was an unusually lively meeting, and did not adjourn till a late hour, when it broke up with three shrill cheers for the new member. what it was, she had no idea as yet, but left it for time to tell her, and meanwhile, found her greatest affliction in the fact that she couldn’t read, run, and ride as much as she liked. are you going to new york this winter?” as miss lamb had ‘enjoyed’ the story, this speech was not exactly grateful or complimentary. “such a man!” laughed good-natured mrs. ” “so we are to countenance things and people which we detest, merely because we are not belles and millionaires, are we? that’s a nice sort of morality. meg, isn’t that the man who bowed to you one day when we were shopping?” “so it is. t. the second year began rather soberly, for their prospects did not brighten, and aunt march died suddenly. it was a moonlight night, and about one o’clock flo and i were waked by the most delicious music under our windows. there was a crowd about it all day long, and the tenders were constantly flying to and fro with important faces and rattling money boxes. poor thing! she’d be so nice if she was only got up in style. for a long time there was a lull in the ‘mud-pie’ business, and she devoted herself to the finest pen-and-ink drawing, in which she showed such taste and skill that her graceful handiwork proved both pleasant and profitable. she had promised to love him for better or worse, and then she, his wife, had reproached him with his poverty, after spending his earnings recklessly. moffat, lumbering in like an elephant in silk and lace. ” just what laurie longed to say, with a different meaning! as he listened, he lost his place, the music ended with a broken chord, and the musician sat silent in the dark. brooke, with her apron over her head, sat sobbing dismally. i want to do something splendid before i go into my castle, something heroic or wonderful that won’t be forgotten after i’m dead. i was very grateful for his kindness, and would be his friend, but nothing more, for a long while. it had been tried, but she suffered so much that it was given up, and she did her lessons at home with her father. you haven’t a bit of proper pride, and never will learn when to hold your tongue and when to speak,” said amy despairingly. we invited him to our party, but he didn’t come. that was dreadful. my dear mentor, please make my adieux to your aunt, and exult within yourself, for ‘lazy laurence’ has gone to his grandpa, like the best of boys. he never loses patience, never doubts or complains, but always hopes, and works and waits so cheerfully that one is ashamed to do otherwise before him. i felt bad but did not fret i bear my troubles well but i do wish hannah would put more starch in my aprons and have buckwheats every day. excuse me for a moment. “i merely intend to make myself entrancingly agreeable to every one i know, and to keep them in your corner as long as possible. hannah was out of humor because her week’s work was deranged, and prophesied that “ef the washin’ and ironin’ warn’t done reg’lar, nothin’ would go well anywheres”. teddy was only a boy, and soon got over his little fancy,” said jo, anxious to correct the professor’s mistake. ” “i’m not a show, aunty, and no one is coming to stare at me, to criticize my dress, or count the cost of my luncheon. “yes, i think she would,” returned laurie gravely. ” “well, i despise you. ” “then you are fond of old fred?” “i could be, if i tried. aren’t you glad i did it?” laurie spoke very fast, and turned red and excited all in a minute, for he had kept his plot a secret, for fear of disappointing the girls or harming beth. beth looked so amazed at the idea that jo smiled in spite of her pain, and added softly, “then you didn’t, dearie? i was afraid it was so, and imagined your poor little heart full of lovelornity all that while. these children are wiser than we are, and i have no doubt the boy understands every word i have said to him. so she asked what she should use for new heads, since the old ones were lost, and all the geese opened their hundred mouths and screamed. mrs. “i know it will. ” miss kate did know several new games, and as the girls would not, and the boys could not, eat any more, they all adjourned to the drawing room to play rig-marole. “fritz is getting gray and stout. cornelius, she racked her brain to remember what hannah did that she left undone, she reboiled, resugared, and restrained, but that dreadful stuff wouldn’t ‘jell’. with this idea in her head, she hailed an approaching omnibus with such a hasty gesture that the daisies flew out of the pot and were badly damaged. but somehow envy and discontent soon vanished when she thought of all the patient love and labor john had put into the little home awaiting her, and when they sat together in the twilight, talking over their small plans, the future always grew so beautiful and bright that she forgot sallie’s splendor and felt herself the richest, happiest girl in christendom. “why didn’t you pop out and tell them so on the spot?” “i couldn’t, it was so embarrassing for me. he that is humble ever shall have god to be his guide. “i’m through! now, miss jo, i’ll settle you, and get in first,” cried the young gentleman, swinging his mallet for another blow. i won’t bear it. you needn’t go right back, need you?” “not if you want me, dear. while this attack lasted, the family lived in constant fear of a conflagration, for the odor of burning wood pervaded the house at all hours, smoke issued from attic and shed with alarming frequency, red-hot pokers lay about promiscuously, and hannah never went to bed without a pail of water and the dinner bell at her door in case of fire. please go away and let me be!” poor mr. “scold as much as you like, you’ll never see your silly old book again,” cried amy, getting excited in her turn. “the game, i mean?” “what is it?” said fred. her grandfather often called her ‘beth’, and her grandmother watched over her with untiring devotion, as if trying to atone for some past mistake, which no eye but her own could see. demi paused to consider the new relationship before he compromised himself by the rash acceptance of a bribe, which took the tempting form of a family of wooden bears from berne. ” “why, please?” “because, dear, i don’t think you suited to one another. i’ll work and pray and fight against it. “tell me all about it, and let me cure it as i often did the other. i heard one of the young men tell another that he knew i’d been an actress, in fact, he thought he remembered seeing me at one of the minor theaters. on the second saturday after jo got out of the window, meg, as she sat sewing at her window, was scandalized by the sight of laurie chasing jo all over the garden and finally capturing her in amy’s bower. meg arranged the tea table, jo brought wood and set chairs, dropping, over-turning, and clattering everything she touched. i am too stupid to learn,” i blundered out, as red as a peony. she hated calls of the formal sort, and never made any till amy compelled her with a bargain, bribe, or promise. she said nothing at first, for she liked to hear him laugh out his big, hearty laugh when anything funny happened, so she left him to discover it for himself, and presently forgot all about it, for to hear a german read schiller is rather an absorbing occupation. prim little winkle too is here, with every hair in place, a model of propriety, though he hates to wash his face. several days of unusually mild weather fitly ushered in a splendid christmas day. earth hath no sorrow that heaven cannot heal; and amy leaned against her husband, who stood behind her, feeling that her welcome home was not quite perfect without beth’s kiss. “don’t know a word. i will tell you some of them, for the time has come when a word may set this romantic little head and heart of yours right, on a very serious subject. the little girls, however, considered it a most agreeable and interesting event, and jo got little comfort from them, so she went up to her refuge in the garret, and confided her troubles to the rats. ” “you needn’t feel wicked, my child! you had no winter things and got the simplest with your own hard earnings,” said mrs. “i don’t believe it’s the right sort of love, and i’d rather not try it,” was the decided answer. “the rival painters. march looked grave and grieved, and amy felt that no one would love her till she had asked pardon for the act which she now regretted more than any of them. as i went upstairs after dinner, two of the young men were settling their hats before the hall mirror, and i heard one say low to the other, “who’s the new party?” “governess, or something of that sort. that hiss, faint as it was, irritated the irascible gentleman, and sealed the culprit’s fate. a stealthy glance now and then refreshed her like sips of fresh water after a dusty walk, for the sidelong peeps showed her several propitious omens. when we make little sacrifices we like to have them appreciated, at least, and for a minute amy was sorry she had done it, feeling that virtue was not always its own reward. ” “we will, mother! we will!” the rattle of an approaching carriage made them all start and listen. “how would you like to be shut up for hours with a nervous, fussy old lady, who keeps you trotting, is never satisfied, and worries you till you’re ready to fly out the window or cry?” “it’s naughty to fret, but i do think washing dishes and keeping things tidy is the worst work in the world. in stumbling to the door, she upset the basket, and—oh horror!—the lobster, in all its vulgar size and brilliancy, was revealed to the highborn eyes of a tudor! “by jove, she’s forgotten her dinner!” cried the unconscious youth, poking the scarlet monster into its place with his cane, and preparing to hand out the basket after the old lady. chapter thirty-one our foreign correspondent london dearest people, here i really sit at a front window of the bath hotel, piccadilly. well, i think we are. thank you all for my happy wedding day. kirke says, and takes it so good-naturedly that they all like him in spite of his foreign ways. but his polite regrets didn’t impose upon her, and when she galloped away with the count, she saw laurie sit down by her aunt with an actual expression of relief. ” as they sat sewing together, jo discovered how much improved her sister meg was, how well she could talk, how much she knew about good, womanly impulses, thoughts, and feelings, how happy she was in husband and children, and how much they were all doing for each other. ” john laughed, and drew her round beside him, saying goodhumoredly, “don’t go and hide. i’m as proud as lucifer, but such favors from such people don’t burden me, and i accepted gratefully. “i am not sorry you lost them, for you broke the rules, and deserved some punishment for disobedience,” was the severe reply, which rather disappointed the young lady, who expected nothing but sympathy. “don’t you like me so?” asked meg. laurie ran to meet and present them to his friends in the most cordial manner. “you think i’m not kind to him, hey?” was the sharp answer. i’ll help you. she boiled the asparagus for an hour and was grieved to find the heads cooked off and the stalks harder than ever. ” amy spoke earnestly, and jo said, with a cordial hug, “i understand now what you mean, and i’ll never laugh at you again. one of the captivating children, who seem made to be kissed and cuddled, adorned and adored like little goddesses, and produced for general approval on all festive occasions. “you are old enough to leave off boyish tricks, and to behave better, josephine. ” something in his resolute tone made jo look up quickly to find him looking down at her with an expression that assured her the dreaded moment had come, and made her put out her hand with an imploring, “no, teddy. i enjoyed it very much, and when we unmasked it was fun to see them stare at me. no one said anything, till laurie, who insisted on serving the bride, appeared before her, with a loaded salver in his hand and a puzzled expression on his face. poetic fire lights up his eye, he struggles ’gainst his lot. he will make a fine man, if not spoiled by petting,” replied her mother. ” “with all the pleasure in life. “a colliery,” remarks uncle, with a twinkle of the eye. tell them i think of them by day, pray for them by night, and find my best comfort in their affection at all times. what do you want for lunch? cake, sandwiches, fruit, and coffee will be all that is necessary, i suppose?” “oh, dear, no! we must have cold tongue and chicken, french chocolate and ice cream, besides. “i hope i shall have done something to be proud of by that time, but i’m such a lazy dog, i’m afraid i shall dawdle, jo. i’d do as much for our jimmy any day if i had a spire of hair worth selling. ” “yes, indeed, and there’s another class who can’t ask, and who suffer in silence. 1. “lucky for you i am, for if i put on crushed airs and tried to be dismal, as you do, we should be in a nice state. that’s about it, isn’t it, madame recamier?” asked laurie with a quizzical look at amy. ” interrupted jo, with a grateful kiss. “i’m going to the bankers first for letters, and then to castle hill. learn to know and value the praise which is worth having, and to excite the admiration of excellent people by being modest as well as pretty, meg. “now let us go home, and never mind aunt march today. “so i did! well, i am happy, and i won’t fret, but it does seem as if the more one gets the more one wants, doesn’t it? there now, the trays are ready, and everything in but my ball dress, which i shall leave for mother to pack,” said meg, cheering up, as she glanced from the half-filled trunk to the many times pressed and mended white tarlaton, which she called her ‘ball dress’ with an important air. “i should think every young man would want to go, though it is hard for the mothers and sisters who stay at home,” she added sorrowfully. now, isn’t it a dreadful state of things?” “do you think meg cares for him?” asked mrs. perhaps they forgot it. ” “i’ll ask laurie. my dear, it’s really dreadful, for sometimes she is so bad her frock is up to her knees, and she can’t come to school. e. “no, thank you, ma’am,” replied sallie. she was wrong, of course, but then she was young. aunt gave me the ring today. she’s got such a soft heart, it will melt like butter in the sun if anyone looks sentimentlly at her. ” “not through me,” said jo decidedly. ” “i thought i’d grieved you. ” “yes, i should think so,” and laurie thought regretfully of his own idle days. march said, in her serious yet cheery way. ” “that boy put it into his head, i know he did! he’s a capital fellow, and i wish we could get acquainted. ” “prut! that i do not believe. meg knew sallie and was at her ease very soon, but jo, who didn’t care much for girls or girlish gossip, stood about, with her back carefully against the wall, and felt as much out of place as a colt in a flower garden. now i’m going to make you hear, and give me an answer, for i can’t go on so any longer. jo glanced over her shoulder, and the little demon she was harboring said in her ear. i didn’t mean to go down, having no dress. it was astonishing what a peculiar and uncomfortable state of things was produced by the ‘resting and reveling’ process. “i guess he’ll like it,” added beth. i’m not aristocratic, but i do object to being seen with a person who looks like a young prize fighter,” observed jo severely. ” “he tried not to be selfish, but he has felt rather forlorn, i fancy. but someone did come and help her, though jo did not recognize her good angels at once because they wore familiar shapes and used the simple spells best fitted to poor humanity. it might seem no hardship to some of us, but to a pretty, blithe young girl, it was not only tedious, but very trying, and the thought of laurie and his friends made it a real martyrdom. brooke, so i thought you wouldn’t mind if i kept my little secret for a few days. it was a piteous sight, the once rosy face so changed and vacant, the once busy hands so weak and wasted, the once smiling lips quite dumb, and the once pretty, well-kept hair scattered rough and tangled on the pillow. before the evening was half over, jo felt so completely disillusioned, that she sat down in a corner to recover herself. 9. i tried to think it was a sick fancy, and would not let it trouble anyone. but he did, and his own changed again from that momentary anxiety to its usual expression, as he said cordially. ” “why, jo, how could i, when he was so fond of you?” asked beth, as innocently as a child. “none of them. “i’m tired of it and mean to go to work at something right off. the fat turkey was a sight to behold, when hannah sent him up, stuffed, browned, and decorated. 3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose. “everything of amy’s sold long ago. bhaer, and follows him about the house like a dog whenever he is at home, which delights him, as he is very fond of children, though a ‘bacheldore’. ” “and so you shall, like an angel as you are!” cried laurie, resolving, with a glow of philanthropic zeal, to found and endow an institution for the express benefit of young women with artistic tendencies. hugo, getting thirsty after a long warble, drinks it, loses his wits, and after a good deal of clutching and stamping, falls flat and dies, while hagar informs him what she has done in a song of exquisite power and melody. 1. dear, bequeath me that great patience which has power to sustain a cheerful, uncomplaining spirit in its prison-house of pain. “what do you say, beth?” “i was thinking about our ‘_pilgrim’s progress_’,” answered beth, who had not heard a word. no notice was taken of amy’s flight, except by her mates, but the sharp-eyed demoiselles discovered that mr. ’ “ah! but i haf an eye, and i see much. she walked up and down the long saloon while waiting for laurie, and once arranged herself under the chandelier, which had a good effect upon her hair, then she thought better of it, and went away to the other end of the room, as if ashamed of the girlish desire to have the first view a propitious one. the old lady likes me, and i’ll be as sweet as possible to her, so she won’t peck at us, whatever we do. ” “will you take me out in the trotting wagon with puck?” “on my honor as a gentleman. ” jo thanked him and gladly went, wishing she had two neat gloves when she saw the nice, pearl-colored ones her partner wore. ” “couldn’t you satisfy your grandpa in any other way?” “no, he would have the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. no, by george, it wasn’t! and meg must know it. march, drawing the blowzy head to her shoulder and kissing the wet cheek so tenderly that jo cried even harder. home grew homelike again, and john had no wish to leave it, unless he took meg with him. “dear me, i didn’t know anyone was here!” stammered jo, preparing to back out as speedily as she had bounced in. i wouldn’t marry a man i hated or despised. half resolving never to return, she went home, and worked off her irritation by stitching pinafores vigorously, and in an hour or two was cool enough to laugh over the scene and long for next week. “i am bold to say it in spite of the rain, because so short a time remains to me. now, in the first flush of the new life, she had often said, “my husband shall always feel free to bring a friend home whenever he likes. this much-enduring man had succeeded in banishing chewing gum after a long and stormy war, had made a bonfire of the confiscated novels and newspapers, had suppressed a private post office, had forbidden distortions of the face, nicknames, and caricatures, and done all that one man could do to keep half a hundred rebellious girls in order. tupman mr. “i am not sure, but i think it was because his son, laurie’s father, married an italian lady, a musician, which displeased the old man, who is very proud. if anybody had asked amy what the greatest trial of her life was, she would have answered at once, “my nose. ” “me to go with her!” burst in jo, flying out of her chair in an uncontrollable rapture. bhaer took a little worn paper out of his waistcoat pocket. ” “i’m glad you can’t flirt. ” it was a characteristic speech, and sounded daring, but audacity becomes young people, and amy’s ambition had a good foundation. don’t you like limes?” “not much. ” “graduating well, you mean? that was no more than you ought to have done, for your grandfather’s sake. “right, jo. jo’s book was the pride of her heart, and was regarded by her family as a literary sprout of great promise. not a word did she say, however, till her mother found her in tears one day, and insisted on knowing what the matter was, for meg’s drooping spirits had not escaped her observation. march, with placid satisfaction, from the hearthrug, after the last guest had gone. ” “then why did you do it?” said laurie’s eyes, so plainly that meg hastily added. ” meg sighed, and turned to the frostbitten garden again. ” then she sighed, and fell into a reverie from which she did not wake till the early twilight sent her down to take new observations, which only confirmed her suspicion. what were you about all that time, hidden away there?” jo told her adventures, and by the time she had finished they were at home. also my $100, to do what he likes with. i’m very sorry i was so cross, but i can’t help wishing you’d bear it better, teddy, dear. on monday morning the weather was in that undecided state which is more exasperating than a steady pour. “girls’ quarrels are soon over,” returned her mother, feeling a trifle ashamed of her own part in this one, as well she might. ” “well, she needn’t get out her bandboxes yet. brooke. “why in the world should you spend your money, worry your family, and turn the house upside down for a parcel of girls who don’t care a sixpence for you? i thought you had too much pride and sense to truckle to any mortal woman just because she wears french boots and rides in a coupe,” said jo, who, being called from the tragic climax of her novel, was not in the best mood for social enterprises. “don’t feel that i am separated from you, marmee dear, or that i love you any the less for loving john so much,” she said, clinging to her mother, with full eyes for a moment. now i must go back to beth. for the touch of grief will render my wild nature more serene, give to life new aspirations, a new trust in the unseen. ” “oh, where are you going?” she cried, for his face frightened her. “didn’t i do well?” asked jo, with a satisfied air as they walked away. peeping through the meshes of the hammock, he saw the marches coming out, as if bound on some expedition. go on, and tell the truth, if you can, sir. poor jo tried desperately to be good, but her bosom enemy was always ready to flame up and defeat her, and it took years of patient effort to subdue it. i am needed. ” “no, i don’t—oh, dear, no!—but i hear people talking about money being such a temptation, and i sometimes wish you were poor. ” “she is putting on airs already,” said laurie, who regarded the idea in the light of a capital joke. my heart was sore for you when i heard that,” and he shook hands again, with such a sympathetic face that jo felt as if no comfort could equal the look of the kind eyes, the grasp of the big, warm hand. it did not seem at all comical to meg, who kissed and caressed the afflicted heroine in the tenderest manner. “why don’t you send home for another?” said sallie, who was not an observing young lady. you can talk so well, look so aristocratic in your best things, and behave so beautifully, if you try, that i’m proud of you. ” while laurie listlessly watched the procession of priests under their canopies, white-veiled nuns bearing lighted tapers, and some brotherhood in blue chanting as they walked, amy watched him, and felt a new sort of shyness steal over her, for he was changed, and she could not find the merry-faced boy she left in the moody-looking man beside her. “oh, teddy, such doings!” and jo told amy’s wrongs with sisterly zeal. just wait ten years, and see if we don’t,” said amy, who sat in a corner making mud pies, as hannah called her little clay models of birds, fruit, and faces. so the year rolled round, and at midsummer there came to meg a new experience, the deepest and tenderest of a woman’s life. “yes, i am, and admiring the mole in your chin at the same time. “i never enjoyed housekeeping, and i’m going to take a vacation today, and read, write, go visiting, and amuse myself. “that’s nothing compared to some of her brilliant performances. “she’s right, the lad is lonely. she saw mr. “tut, tut, tut! that was the boy’s affair. i don’t know how long it will last, but i’m not afraid of storms, for i’m learning how to sail my ship. it’s the old martin house, but i’ve stopped up the door and made the roof open, so it will hold all sorts of things, and save our valuable time. curiosity and wonder possessed all hearts, but respect restrained all tongues till the holy rite was over. “say what you like then. “any time when john is away and you get frightened, mrs. then tea must be got, errands done, and one or two necessary bits of sewing neglected until the last minute. “yes, my dear, i have a great many, all mothers do, but mine differ somewhat from mrs. “spirits. march’. c. rest a little, and let me row. “no. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1. ” and beth looked at her rough hands with a sigh that any one could hear that time. she told her story, expecting to be consoled, but laurie only put his hands in his pockets and walked about the room, whistling softly, as he knit his brows in deep thought. “now, my dear, make yourself at home,” said mrs. a very natural and forgivable mistake, meg, but one that had better be remedied before you take to different ways, for children should draw you nearer than ever, not separate you, as if they were all yours, and john had nothing to do but support them. “it’s like his writing,” faltered meg, comparing it with the note in her hand. “what possessed you to tell those stories about my saddle, and the hats and boots, and all the rest of it?” “why, it’s funny, and amuses people. 3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work. laurence and aunt march, for when the stately old gentleman chasseed solemnly up to the old lady, she just tucked her cane under her arm, and hopped briskly away to join hands with the rest and dance about the bridal pair, while the young folks pervaded the garden like butterflies on a midsummer day. you may trust me. hannah scolded, meg cried, and jo was at her wits’ end, till she decided to take things into her own hands. bhaer sat looking about him with the air of a traveler who knocks at a strange door, and when it opens, finds himself at home. ” “i do like them, and i shall be one if i can, for in spite of the laughing the world would never get on without them. they were not all there. “how can i be otherwise?” said mrs. ” “shouldn’t ask you, if i didn’t. he traveled a long while, nearly eight-and-twenty years, and had a hard time of it, till he came to the palace of a good old king, who had offered a reward to anyone who could tame and train a fine but unbroken colt, of which he was very fond. part 2 in order that we may start afresh and go to meg’s wedding. hannah had ‘dished up’ an astonishing breakfast for the traveler, finding it impossible to vent her excitement in any other way, and meg and jo fed their mother like dutiful young storks, while they listened to her whispered account of father’s state, mr. laurence not only bought the vases, but pervaded the hall with one under each arm. ’” (here jo looked up quickly, as if about to speak, but changed her mind, seeing that the story was not done yet. so i begged him to take it, and told him why i was in such a hurry. ” then she told the various bits of gossip she had heard at the moffats’, and as she spoke, jo saw her mother fold her lips tightly, as if ill pleased that such ideas should be put into meg’s innocent mind. somewhat daunted by this reception, jo hesitated on the threshold, murmuring in much embarrassment. it’s a lovely day, no prospect of rain, and you pride yourself on keeping promises, so be honorable, come and do your duty, and then be at peace for another six months. march looked surprised, but not displeased. when he had gone, she went to her little chapel, and sitting in the twilight, prayed for beth, with streaming tears and an aching heart, feeling that a million turquoise rings would not console her for the loss of her gentle little sister. there will be so little to do that with lotty to run my errands and help me here and there, i shall only have enough work to keep me from getting lazy or homesick,” answered meg tranquilly. march could only stretch out her arms, as if to gather children and grandchildren to herself, and say, with face and voice full of motherly love, gratitude, and humility. f. after supper she undertook the german, and blundered through it, nearly upsetting her partner with her long skirt, and romping in a way that scandalized laurie, who looked on and meditated a lecture. it looks like rain,” said her mother, observing that she had on her new bonnet, but not alluding to the fact. “i knew you’d stand by me, sir. i don’t care if hugo does come at me with a pistol,” returned amy, who was not gifted with dramatic power, but was chosen because she was small enough to be borne out shrieking by the villain of the piece. she had an instinctive sense of what was pleasing and proper, always said the right thing to the right person, did just what suited the time and place, and was so self-possessed that her sisters used to say, “if amy went to court without any rehearsal beforehand, she’d know exactly what to do. fred vaughn had returned, and put the question to which she had once decided to answer, “yes, thank you,” but now she said, “no, thank you,” kindly but steadily, for when the time came, her courage failed her, and she found that something more than money and position was needed to satisfy the new longing that filled her heart so full of tender hopes and fears. before he could say more, a bell rang, and jo flew up, exclaiming with alarm, “mercy me! it’s your grandpa!” “well, what if it is? you are not afraid of anything, you know,” returned the boy, looking wicked. don’t you feel that it is pleasanter to help one another, to have daily duties which make leisure sweet when it comes, and to bear and forbear, that home may be comfortable and lovely to us all?” “we do, mother, we do!” cried the girls. but finding them free and easy, she was so herself, and made a good impression. he said ‘girls’, but he meant jo, for she was the only one who kept up the old custom. what odd people these yankees are. laurie is not as respeckful as he ought to be now i am almost in my teens, he calls me chick and hurts my feelings by talking french to me very fast when i say merci or bon jour as hattie king does. he did come very soon, for the same mail brought letters to them both, but he was in germany, and it took some days to reach him. hannah, who had carried wood, made a fire, and stopped up the broken panes with old hats and her own cloak. march lost his property in trying to help an unfortunate friend, the two oldest girls begged to be allowed to do something toward their own support, at least. “i’m the one that will have to fight and work, and climb and wait, and maybe never get in after all. by the time she got cleared up, the dinner arrived and the stove was red-hot. it wasn’t at all the thing, i’m afraid, but the minute she was fairly married, meg cried, “the first kiss for marmee!” and turning, gave it with her heart on her lips. father, we wait your services. it almost seemed as if i’d an arm or leg off. ” “isn’t that an original idea?” cried miss lamb, who found jo great fun. you can’t stay here, so what’s the use of being melodramatic?” “i don’t intend to stay here long, anyway. the children were inconsolable, and mr. 7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. “oh, is he? well, that won’t last long, i fancy. i planned it, and she only gave in after lots of teasing. ” “now, that’s shirking. “you know as well as i that it does make a difference with nearly everyone, so don’t ruffle up like a dear, motherly hen, when your chickens get pecked by smarter birds. read and find him. march, for all had learned by experience that when jo was in that mood words were wasted, and the wisest course was to wait till some little accident, or her own generous nature, softened jo’s resentment and healed the breach. there are some last things to settle,” said meg, bustling away. to may’s great delight, mr. she couldn’t understand it and did not venture to ask questions, so she shook her head and touched up her ponies, as the procession wound away across the arches of the paglioni bridge and vanished in the church. “they are lovely. ” and holding the little paper fast, as if it were a promise yet to be fulfilled, jo laid her head down on a comfortable rag bag, and cried, as if in opposition to the rain pattering on the roof. and when he read his paper of an evening, demi’s colic got into the shipping list and daisy’s fall affected the price of stocks, for mrs. “let it go, it has done its duty, and i will haf a fresh one when i read all the brown book in which she keeps her little secrets,” said mr. for the first time in her life she had been struck, and the disgrace, in her eyes, was as deep as if he had knocked her down. there were lines upon his forehead, but time seemed to have touched him gently, remembering how kind he was to others. ” “tell, then. mrs. 7. bhaer sometimes used eye glasses, and jo had tried them once, smiling to see how they magnified the fine print of her book. a cluster of tea-rose buds at the bosom, and a ruche, reconciled meg to the display of her pretty, white shoulders, and a pair of high-heeled silk boots satisfied the last wish of her heart. but it is nice to be praised and admired, and i can’t help saying i like it,” said meg, looking half ashamed of the confession. i never wanted to make you care for me so, and i went away to keep you from it if i could. “we are playing nargerie,” explained kitty. ” “poor mother! what helped you then?” “your father, jo. a kiss for a blow is always best, though it’s not very easy to give it sometimes,” said her mother, with the air of one who had learned the difference between preaching and practicing. ” everybody cleared up after that, and said something brilliant, or tried to, which did just as well, for laughter is ready when hearts are light. you i leave to enjoy your liberty till you tire of it, for only then will you find that there is something sweeter. on the other side was a stately stone mansion, plainly betokening every sort of comfort and luxury, from the big coach house and well-kept grounds to the conservatory and the glimpses of lovely things one caught between the rich curtains. she had her girlish ambitions and hopes, and felt some disappointment at the humble way in which the new life must begin. i, too, have seen them all, and heartily believe in the sincerity of your resolution, since it begins to bear fruit. she always used to take his arm on these occasions, now she did not, and he made no complaint, which was a bad sign, but talked on rapidly about all sorts of faraway subjects, till they turned from the road into the little path that led homeward through the grove. now, my dear people,” continued jo earnestly, “just understand that this isn’t a new idea of mine, but a long cherished plan. they were very happy, even after they discovered that they couldn’t live on love alone. ” “i always like your games, but if meg doesn’t want me, i’ll go away. ’, for as secret societies were the fashion, it was thought proper to have one, and as all of the girls admired dickens, they called themselves the pickwick club. march, who took peculiar pleasure in granting beth’s requests because she so seldom asked anything for herself. bangs did his best, but left a good deal to the excellent nurse. 1. “you do know her, and she helps you better than anyone else could,” answered laurie, looking at her with such mischievous meaning in his merry black eyes that beth suddenly turned very red, and hid her face in the sofa cushion, quite overcome by such an unexpected discovery. hugo demanded a potion to make zara adore him, and one to destroy roderigo. ” “it’s no use trying to argue with you,” began amy. meg’s mild eyes kindled with anger as she pulled a crumpled note from her pocket and threw it at jo, saying reproachfully, “you wrote it, and that bad boy helped you. if john and my fritz were only here, it would be quite a little heaven on earth,” she added more quietly. “the greek slave, or constantine the avenger,” is the name of this thrilling drama!!! hints if s. 1 through 1. ” beth started, leaned forward, smiled and nodded, watched the passer-by till his quick tramp died away, then said softly as if to herself, “how strong and well and happy that dear boy looks. up in the garret, where jo’s unquiet wanderings ended stood four little wooden chests in a row, each marked with its owners name, and each filled with relics of the childhood and girlhood ended now for all. procrastination is not agreeable,” observed amy, taking a last look at the diamonds. ” she didn’t say “perhaps never,” but each silently added it, thinking of father far away, where the fighting was. “boy and girl. ” the family cardcase having done its duty the girls walked on, and jo uttered another thanksgiving on reaching the fifth house, and being told that the young ladies were engaged. davis, looking, as he felt, uncomfortable. “i saw him at the party, and what you tell shows that he knows how to behave. “that’s the reason i was born in it,” observed jo pensively, quite unconscious of the blot on her nose. “i forgot it. to my dear sister margaret, i give my turkquoise ring (if i get it), also my green box with the doves on it, also my piece of real lace for her neck, and my sketch of her as a memorial of her ‘little girl’. in vain mrs. i don’t care what becomes of me,” and laurie got up with a reckless laugh that grated on his grandfather’s ear. ” “successfully, i hope?” said jo, for the bitterness of disappointment was in that short reply of his. ” “haven’t one to bless myself with. ” • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™ license. chester, who, of course, resented the supposed ridicule of her daughter, said, in a bland tone, but with a cold look. “it’s not the fashion, but it’s becoming, and i can’t afford to make a fright of myself,” she used to say, when advised to frizzle, puff, or braid, as the latest style commanded. “why not? i’m neat and cool and comfortable, quite proper for a dusty walk on a warm day. she was living in bad society, and imaginary though it was, its influence affected her, for she was feeding heart and fancy on dangerous and unsubstantial food, and was fast brushing the innocent bloom from her nature by a premature acquaintance with the darker side of life, which comes soon enough to all of us. “are you satisfied? does it seem like home, and do you feel as if you should be happy here?” asked mrs. for a minute jo’s heart stood still, as he swung himself down the bank toward the river, but it takes much folly, sin or misery to send a young man to a violent death, and laurie was not one of the weak sort who are conquered by a single failure. but she did not get it, for though he joined her and answered all her questions freely, she could only learn that he had roved about the continent and been to greece. so brilliant and gay without, for all the world seemed abroad to welcome the first snow. “try again. “not much. i really need some music to put me in tune. 9. the correspondence flourished famously, and letters flew to and fro with unfailing regularity all through the early spring. p. “bless me! how old i shall be, twenty-seven!” exclaimed meg, who felt grown up already, having just reached seventeen. “you sly creature! of course we meant the young man,” exclaimed miss belle, laughing. bhaer saw the drops on her cheeks, though she turned her head away. ” and taking up the hand which lay on the arm of his chair, he pointed to the roughened forefinger, a burn on the back, and two or three little hard spots on the palm. she was not elegantly dressed, but a noble-looking woman, and the girls thought the gray cloak and unfashionable bonnet covered the most splendid mother in the world. ” “the idea of being afraid of you! well, you see we used to play pilgrim’s progress, and we have been going on with it in earnest, all winter and summer. ” “is the pain better now?” “oh, yes, much better, you are so comfortable, jo. ’ jo devoted herself to beth day and night, not a hard task, for beth was very patient, and bore her pain uncomplainingly as long as she could control herself. “if i was a boy, we’d run away together, and have a capital time, but as i’m a miserable girl, i must be proper and stop at home. ” “now, marmee, that is very cunning of you to turn our own stories against us, and give us a sermon instead of a romance!” cried meg. now mr. “why don’t you write? that always used to make you happy,” said her mother once, when the desponding fit over-shadowed jo. ” “i’ll manage him. i used to think i couldn’t let you go, but i’m learning to feel that i don’t lose you, that you’ll be more to me than ever, and death can’t part us, though it seems to. i love you so much, dear,” added mr. chapter two a merry christmas jo was the first to wake in the gray dawn of christmas morning. nice animal for a pleasure party, wasn’t it?” “which did she choose?” asked one of the laughing gentlemen, who enjoyed the subject. i only want some money,” said laurie, walking on again, appeased by her hearty tone. , and i don’t want anyone to use these but marmee,” said beth, looking troubled. “here’s a scrape! do let me bring that wicked boy over to explain and be lectured. e. mary kingsley insisted on lending her her watch till recess, and jenny snow, a satirical young lady, who had basely twitted amy upon her limeless state, promptly buried the hatchet and offered to furnish answers to certain appalling sums. ” “s’ant!” replied the young rebel, helping himself to the coveted ‘cakie’, and beginning to eat the same with calm audacity. after this, the boys dispersed for a final lark, leaving mrs. • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1. the house is empty half the day, so come and drum away as much as you like, and i shall be obliged to you. “my old white one again, if i can mend it fit to be seen, it got sadly torn last night,” said meg, trying to speak quite easily, but feeling very uncomfortable. don’t say anything till jo has got good-natured with laurie, than take a quiet minute and just kiss her, or do some kind thing, and i’m sure she’ll be friends again with all her heart. ” “you are so generous and kind-hearted that you let people borrow, and can’t say ‘no’ to anyone. ” and jo pulled her hair again with a wrathful tweak. “you don’t know, you can’t guess how bad it is! it seems as if i could do anything when i’m in a passion. laurence, hale and hearty as ever, was quite as much improved as the others by his foreign tour, for the crustiness seemed to be nearly gone, and the old-fashioned courtliness had received a polish which made it kindlier than ever. long, quiet days she spent, not lonely nor idle, for her little world was peopled with imaginary friends, and she was by nature a busy bee. the golden secretary darted through the room like a meteor with a dashing french-woman who carpeted the floor with her pink satin train. ” “is that all?” said jo, looking disappointed, as laurie nodded and twinkled with a face full of mysterious intelligence. i don’t like your gown, but i do think you are just splendid. here was the task, not what she had expected, but better because self had no part in it. for a minute he was ruffled again at the mere thought of it, and then the fear that meg would cry herself sick softened his heart, and sent him on at a quicker pace, resolving to be calm and kind, but firm, quite firm, and show her where she had failed in her duty to her spouse. mrs. on reading over my letter, it strikes me as rather bhaery, but i am always interested in odd people, and i really had nothing else to write about. “it’s so hard i’m afraid to try,” said meg, grateful, but bashful in the presence of the accomplished young lady beside her. ” “what fun it was, especially going by the lions, fighting apollyon, and passing through the valley where the hob-goblins were,” said jo. “i should think i was a pretty lucky chap if i could. she very soon discovered that there is a charm about fine clothes which attracts a certain class of people and secures their respect. “in most families there comes, now and then, a year full of events. the plan of ‘going over’ was not forgotten. as she said, she was ‘fond of luxury’, and her chief trouble was poverty. the study door flew open, the little red wrapper appeared on the threshold, joy put strength into the feeble limbs, and beth ran straight into her father’s arms. “this is a regular honeymoon paradise, isn’t it? did you ever see such roses?” asked amy, pausing on the terrace to enjoy the view, and a luxurious whiff of perfume that came wandering by. ” “you know where it is, then!” “no, i don’t. “a large sheaf, but i know there’s room in your heart for it, marmee dear,” added meg’s tender voice. ” i promised to do so, but left the door open and enjoyed the fun as much as they did, for a more glorious frolic i never witnessed. the great novelist vibrated between two decanters with the regularity of a pendulum; the famous divine flirted openly with one of the madame de staels of the age, who looked daggers at another corinne, who was amiably satirizing her, after outmaneuvering her in efforts to absorb the profound philosopher, who imbibed tea johnsonianly and appeared to slumber, the loquacity of the lady rendering speech impossible. i’ll put them down, they’ll be needed and i must go prepared for nursing. both looked quite ‘calm and firm’, and both felt desperately uncomfortable. “if life is often as hard as this, i don’t see how we ever shall get through it,” added her sister despondently. jo wrote no more sensational stories, deciding that the money did not pay for her share of the sensation, but going to the other extreme, as is the way with people of her stamp, she took a course of mrs. ” “don’t let amy come. after various lesser mishaps, meg was finished at last, and by the united exertions of the entire family jo’s hair was got up and her dress on. if he’s done anything amiss, he shall confess, beg pardon, and be punished. she remembered that laurie never spoke voluntarily of jo, she recalled the shadow on his face just now, the change in his character, and the wearing of the little old ring which was no ornament to a handsome hand. ” “yes,” said jo, knitting her brows, “that’s just it. i’m proud to shake this good, industrious little hand, and hope i shall not soon be asked to give it away. i can’t ask it of you at your age,” began laurie, who was grateful for the sacrifice, but much preferred to go alone, if he went at all. she was sorry she had so little to give, and left locks of hair to the rest of us, and her best love to grandpa. “yes, but i don’t know much, except about bread and a few trifles. march, patting the damask tablecloths, with a truly feminine appreciation of their fineness. ” he spoke so kindly, and opened hans anderson’s fairy tales so invitingly before me, that i was more ashamed than ever, and went at my lesson in a neck-or-nothing style that seemed to amuse him immensely. ” laurie threw back his head, and laughed so heartily at this attack, that the felt hat fell off, and jo walked on it, which insult only afforded him an opportunity for expatiating on the advantages of a rough-and-ready costume, as he folded up the maltreated hat, and stuffed it into his pocket. for the fun of it we bring our things in these bags, wear the old hats, use poles to climb the hill, and play pilgrims, as we used to do years ago. then the curtain fell, and the audience reposed and ate candy while discussing the merits of the play. i’m not afraid of being poor, for i’ve been happy so far, and i know i shall be with him because he loves me, and i. scott had married and gone to housekeeping not far off, and john fell into the way of running over for an hour or two of an evening, when his own parlor was empty, and his own wife singing lullabies that seemed to have no end. “come in!” and mr. “this will be a regularly merry christmas to me, with presents in the morning, you and letters in the afternoon, and a party at night,” said amy, as they alighted among the ruins of the old fort, and a flock of splendid peacocks came trooping about them, tamely waiting to be fed. but three months passed, and there was no return of repose. they went to the theater with us, and we did have such a good time, for frank devoted himself to flo, and fred and i talked over past, present, and future fun as if we had known each other all our days. e. it was uninteresting sewing, but tonight no one grumbled. winkle [the above is a manly and handsome acknowledgment of past misdemeanors. i’m too busy to be worried with nonsense, and i think it’s dreadful to break up families so. hold back your shoulders, and carry your hands easily, no matter if your gloves do pinch. “how old is he?” “sixteen or seventeen, i should say,” replied another voice. brooke lay on the grass with a book, which he did not read. ” that answer pleased the old gentleman. ” jo looked relieved, and after a pause, said, smiling, “how mrs. i also doubt if any young matron ever began life with so rich a supply of dusters, holders, and piece bags, for beth made enough to last till the silver wedding came round, and invented three different kinds of dishcloths for the express service of the bridal china. ” jo saw that her mother’s eyes filled and her lips trembled as she spoke, and fearing that she had said too much, she whispered anxiously, “was it wrong to watch you and to speak of it? i didn’t mean to be rude, but it’s so comfortable to say all i think to you, and feel so safe and happy here. and to the rest she added a pint of milk, two eggs, four spoons of sugar, nutmeg, and some crackers, put it in a deep dish, and baked it till it was brown and nice, and next day it was eaten by a family named march. laurence looked relieved, evidently taking the whole as a joke. a regular menagerie appeared in barn and shed, for pet animals were allowed. “no, to remind me not to be selfish. she colored angrily, but took no other notice of that girlish sarcasm, and answered with unexpected amiability. i’d rather. a warning look from her mother checked any further remarks, and the whole family ate in heroic silence, till mr. to my mother, all my clothes, except the blue apron with pockets—also my likeness, and my medal, with much love. ” “none of that, it is forbidden. where now?” asked laurie, leaning back and folding his arms, a proceeding which suited amy, who preferred to drive, for her parasol whip and blue reins over the white ponies’ backs afforded her infinite satisfaction. “’tis she!’ cried count gustave, and fell at her feet in an ecstasy of joy. “oh, yes, well, we give from twenty-five to thirty for things of this sort. “change it,” advised jo. ever your amy chapter thirty-two tender troubles “jo, i’m anxious about beth. we were laughing over it when all of a sudden his eye _was_ on us, and he ordered susie to bring up her slate. i made it like those beth invented, a big butterfly with a fat body, and black and yellow wings, worsted feelers, and bead eyes. i never wanted to go away, and the hard part now is the leaving you all. it all came about so naturally that no one could complain, and he knew that everybody would be pleased, even jo. f. ” lying back on the sofa, she read the manuscript carefully through, making dashes here and there, and putting in many exclamation points, which looked like little balloons. but no one found the words thoughtless or untrue, for beth still seemed among them, a peaceful presence, invisible, but dearer than ever, since death could not break the household league that love made dissoluble. ” “i’ll go. “but may i inquire how you intend to support the establishment? if all the pupils are little ragamuffins, i’m afraid your crop won’t be profitable in a worldly sense, mrs. “i hope you will be a great deal better, dear, but you must keep watch over your ‘bosom enemy’, as father calls it, or it may sadden, if not spoil your life. he did like it, so don’t scold, jo,” said beth meekly. “you haven’t heard what i wanted to tell you. march kept a few relics of past splendor, as gifts for her girls when the proper time came. “so i do! will you come, please?” cried laurie. it’s a great comfort to have an artistic sister. god bless you, my dear! good day, madam. it was all heavenly, but i was glad to see the irish coast, and found it very lovely, so green and sunny, with brown cabins here and there, ruins on some of the hills, and gentlemen’s countryseats in the valleys, with deer feeding in the parks. chester alluded to her ‘charming novel’, and the misses chester introduced parties, picnics, the opera, and the fashions. i’m rather proud of my wife’s feet, and don’t mind if she does pay eight or nine dollars for her boots, if they are good ones. i implore you to say nothing to your family yet, but to send one word of hope through laurie to, “your devoted john. aunt march usually gave the sisters a present of twenty-five dollars apiece at new year’s. “it has seemed shorter than usual, but so uncomfortable,” said meg. “i’ll do my lessons every day, and not spend so much time with my music and dolls. out with it, jo. it’s a nonsensical notion of mine, and i’m not going to give up to it. ” “and you don’t think me as handsome as your grandfather?” “not quite, sir. you only go halves,” said laurie consolingly. chapter six beth finds the palace beautiful the big house did prove a palace beautiful, though it took some time for all to get in, and beth found it very hard to pass the lions. “it’s no use your going out in the cold to get amy, for they are all coming up presently. and he said it was good, and i shall write more, and he’s going to get the next paid for, and i am so happy, for in time i may be able to support myself and help the girls. ” “so far away!” and jo left her skirts to their fate, as if it didn’t matter now what became of her clothes or herself. “i think i am a little bit afraid of him, but i don’t know why i should be. but when i saw you all so well and strong and full of happy plans, it was hard to feel that i could never be like you, and then i was miserable, jo. the river and the hills are delicious, and these glimpses of the narrow cross streets are my delight. ah, well, ‘die erste liebe ist die beste’, but that i should not expect. march, with his respectable legs in the air, and beside him, likewise prone, was demi, trying to imitate the attitude with his own short, scarlet-stockinged legs, both grovelers so seriously absorbed that they were unconscious of spectators, till mr. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. ” and amy tried on the blue ring with a delighted face and a firm resolve to earn it. ” it cost meg an effort to say that, but sallie did not see it and exclaimed in amiable surprise, “only that? how funny. ” laurie burst out with a hearty boy’s laugh, which made several passers-by smile in spite of themselves. i’m not a fool. ” “i keep turning over new leaves, and spoiling them, as i used to spoil my copybooks, and i make so many beginnings there never will be an end,” he said dolefully. will you come in? it won’t take long. “now we shall try a new way. ” “i’m not the scatterbrain i was. then, when i’ve got a start, i can take in a ragamuffin or two, just for a relish. “a regular daisy. “rather a pleasant year on the whole!” said meg, smiling at the fire, and congratulating herself on having treated mr. amy arranged her bower, put on her best white frock, smoothed her curls, and sat down to draw under the honeysuckle, hoping someone would see and inquire who the young artist was. she asked his opinion on all subjects, she was interested in everything he did, made charming little presents for him, and sent him two letters a week, full of lively gossip, sisterly confidences, and captivating sketches of the lovely scenes about her. here is schiller’s mary stuart and a tutor who loves to teach. “you’d have to take your favorite one. and p. “you may have them, and welcome, without asking, if you want them. with much difficulty and some danger she was dug out, for jo was so overcome with laughter while she excavated that her knife went too far, cut the poor foot, and left a lasting memorial of one artistic attempt, at least. ” “that’s a lie! oh, lor!” cried the parrot, pecking at laurie’s toes. after many skirmishes and snubbings, the ambitious pair were considered effectually quenched and went about with forlorn faces, which were rather belied by explosions of laughter when the two got together. the vaughns hope to meet us in rome next winter, and i shall be dreadfully disappointed if they don’t, for grace and i are great friends, and the boys very nice fellows, especially fred. as meg stood watching the two faces on the pillow, she smiled to herself, and then slipped away again, saying in a satisfied tone, “i never need fear that john will be too harsh with my babies. humor and pathos make it alive, and you have found your style at last. “will demi lie still like a good boy, while mamma runs down and gives poor papa his tea?” asked meg, as the hall door softly closed, and the well-known step went tip-toeing into the dining room. a drop of rain on her cheek recalled her thoughts from baffled hopes to ruined ribbons. he had only been waiting till the aforesaid blighted affections were decently interred. ” “i’m a crotchety old thing, and always shall be, but i’m willing to own that you are right, only it’s easier for me to risk my life for a person than to be pleasant to him when i don’t feel like it. as this is the most prominent, and some say the most attractive table of all, and they are the chief getters-up of the fair, it is thought best for them to take this place. c. rushing upstairs, she startled the invalids by exclaiming tragically as she burst into the room, “oh, do somebody go down quick! john brooke is acting dreadfully, and meg likes it!” mr. and how he provides now for an old woman who nursed his mother, and never tells anyone, but is just as generous and patient and good as he can be. the tea bell rang before he had finished describing the paradise which he meant to earn for meg, and he proudly took her in to supper, both looking so happy that jo hadn’t the heart to be jealous or dismal. ” which decision proved that her second tumble down the beanstalk had done her some good. this funny spectacle appeared to amuse the sun, for he burst out with such radiance that jo woke up and roused her sisters by a hearty laugh at amy’s ornament. now and then, in this workaday world, things do happen in the delightful storybook fashion, and what a comfort it is. meg had spent the time in working as well as waiting, growing womanly in character, wise in housewifely arts, and prettier than ever, for love is a great beautifier. no one disturbed her, and she used to lie there on beth’s little red pillow, planning stories, dreaming dreams, or thinking tender thoughts of the sister who never seemed far away. i shall be very sorry to lose him next year,” said mr. march had consented to the visit rather reluctantly, fearing that margaret would come back more discontented than she went. ” “i’ll leave you in peace if you’ll only let your hair grow. as christmas approached, the usual mysteries began to haunt the house, and jo frequently convulsed the family by proposing utterly impossible or magnificently absurd ceremonies, in honor of this unusually merry christmas. unlike some sufferers, he never spoke of his unrequited passion, and would allow no one, not even mrs. you must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™ works. “daisy and demi, just the thing! i knew teddy would do it,” cried jo clapping her hands. now, my dear boy, just sit quietly down and hear my plan. his tone was properly beseeching, but stealing a shy look at him, meg saw that his eyes were merry as well as tender, and that he wore the satisfied smile of one who had no doubt of his success. ” “that is your best friend, of whom you speak?” he said in an altered tone. “i know he is a good one,” added mrs. thank god he is mending. “amy will be in presently, and she will run down for us,” suggested meg. she did not mind it at the minute, for she lingered to answer hannah’s eager inquiry. ” “is beth the rosy one, who stays at home good deal and sometimes goes out with a little basket?” asked laurie with interest. men seldom do, for when women are the advisers, the lords of creation don’t take the advice till they have persuaded themselves that it is just what they intended to do. love and trust me. ” and he pointed to my work ‘yes,’ they say to one another, these so kind ladies, ‘he is a stupid old fellow, he will see not what we do, he will never observe that his sock heels go not in holes any more, he will think his buttons grow out new when they fall, and believe that strings make theirselves. kate is older than you, fred and frank (twins) about my age, and a little girl (grace), who is nine or ten. mr. you are like a chestnut burr, prickly outside, but silky-soft within, and a sweet kernal, if one can only get at it. ” he drew a little nearer, and looked more like his old self as he said that, and the fear that sometimes weighed on amy’s heart was lightened, for the look, the act, the brotherly ‘my dear’, seemed to assure her that if any trouble did come, she would not be alone in a strange land. “gladly would i give it if i could, but i only know that it was the whim of my timid viola, and i yielded to it. “why, you see, jo is crazy about horses and so am i, but we’ve only got an old sidesaddle and no horse. an hour went by, and nothing happened except laurie’s quiet departure for the station. meg lifted her eyebrows, but jo scowled at her defiantly and said at once, “of course you may. “you don’t have half such a hard time as i do,” said jo. neither said a word, but they hugged one another close, in spite of the blankets, and everything was forgiven and forgotten in one hearty kiss. “and hairpins,” added laurie, throwing half a dozen into jo’s lap. “no, i won’t!” returned jo stoutly, feeling much relieved that her prank was not entirely condemned. it was gone, but beth had remembered the little household ceremony, and there she was, nodding away at them like a rosyfaced mandarin. ” “i’m glad of that. tomorrow i shall put away my ‘fuss and feathers’ and be desperately good again,” she answered with an affected little laugh. march feared that jo would find it difficult to rejoice over it, but her fears were soon set at rest, for though jo looked grave at first, she took it very quietly, and was full of hopes and plans for ‘the children’ before she read the letter twice. if you’re not, i’d like to walk with you and tell you something very interesting. i ought to have read more, for i find i don’t know anything, and it mortifies me. but amy whispered, with full eyes, as she twirled the faded stool, “not tonight, dear. when laurie first went to college, he fell in love about once a month, but these small flames were as brief as ardent, did no damage, and much amused jo, who took great interest in the alternations of hope, despair, and resignation, which were confided to her in their weekly conferences. i never thought it would go where it could tell tales,” said jo, tearing up the verses the professor had treasured so long. it’s an uncommonly fine one, isn’t it?” said tudor, with great presence of mind, and an air of sober interest that did credit to his breeding. “i suppose he’ll laugh and joke over it with laurie, but i shan’t see them, that’s a comfort,” thought amy, as tudor bowed and departed. “it is so beautiful to be loved as laurie loves me. march, returning the look with a keen one. march could reply, mr. brooke wouldn’t write such stuff as that,” she added, scornfully tossing down the paper. it’s very nice, for my friends go too, and the row is full of ladies and gentlemen. that’s proper and appropriate, since he’s a warbler. ” “for me?” gasped beth, holding onto jo and feeling as if she should tumble down, it was such an overwhelming thing altogether. “that mademoiselle has made good use of her time, and the result is charming,” replied laurie, bowing with his hand on his heart and an admiring look. bhaer’s face suddenly recalled the fact that she might find laurie more than a ‘best friend’, and simply because she particularly wished not to look as if anything was the matter, she involuntarily began to blush, and the more she tried not to, the redder she grew. ” jo accepted it with a smile, for she had never outgrown her liking for lads, and soon found herself involved in the usual labyrinth of love, mystery, and murder, for the story belonged to that class of light literature in which the passions have a holiday, and when the author’s invention fails, a grand catastrophe clears the stage of one half the dramatis personae, leaving the other half to exult over their downfall. “i guess the princess gave him a posy, and opened the gate after a while,” said laurie, smiling to himself, as he threw acorns at his tutor. he helped her in many ways, proving himself a true friend, and jo was happy, for while her pen lay idle, she was learning other lessons besides german, and laying a foundation for the sensation story of her own life. “i’ve sprained my ankle. just be a simple, honest, respectable boy, and we’ll never desert you. f. he said he didn’t care about mine, it wasn’t the fashionable color, and he never paid much for it in the first place. they all drank it merrily, and began the experiment by lounging for the rest of the day. having no top to its head, she tied on a neat little cap, and as both arms and legs were gone, she hid these deficiencies by folding it in a blanket and devoting her best bed to this chronic invalid. see, then, my jo—ah, the dear, funny little name—i had a wish to tell something the day i said goodbye in new york, but i thought the handsome friend was betrothed to thee, and so i spoke not. i took care that the right people saw them, and they made a nice little sum of money for us,” returned may, who had overcome sundry small temptations, as well as amy had, that day. “i’m afraid you are busy,” began meg. i take it as a good omen for the future and invite you to my wedding on the spot,” answered mr. bhaer spoke warmly, and walked to the fire, crumpling the paper in his hands. her aunt thought that she regretted her answer to fred, and finding denials useless and explanations impossible, amy left her to think what she liked, taking care that laurie should know that fred had gone to egypt. “jo, dear, i’m very selfish, but i couldn’t spare you, and i’m glad you are not going quite yet,” whispered beth, embracing her, basket and all, with such a clinging touch and loving face that jo felt comforted in spite of the sharp regret that made her want to box her own ears, and humbly beg aunt carrol to burden her with this favor, and see how gratefully she would bear it. “i don’t think i can bear it, but i’ll try,” thought amy, as she was left alone with aunt march. march’s compliments, and would the ladies walk down to supper. “i’ll try. ” “a stunning blow from the big greek lexicon, which an old fellow in a black gown fired at him,” said ned. bhaer ‘a capital old fellow’ in public, never alluded, in the remotest manner, to jo’s improved appearance, or expressed the least surprise at seeing the professor’s hat on the marches’ table nearly every evening. he sprang forward to enter, but the specter plucked him back, and waved threateningly before him a. it was bitter cold in the morning, she dropped her precious turnover in the gutter, aunt march had an attack of the fidgets, meg was sensitive, beth would look grieved and wistful when she got home, and amy kept making remarks about people who were always talking about being good and yet wouldn’t even try when other people set them a virtuous example. “going out for exercise,” answered jo with a mischievous twinkle in her eyes. don’t we always go halves in everything?” began laurie, in the tone that always made jo turn thorny. can’t she? didn’t i make that interrigation point nice? meg says my punchtuation and spelling are disgraceful and i am mortyfied but dear me i have so many things to do, i can’t stop. so i dressed up as mrs. “that’s a ‘label’ on my ‘sect’,” answered laurie, quoting amy, as he went to partake of humble pie dutifully with his grandfather, who was quite saintly in temper and overwhelmingly respectful in manner all the rest of the day. feeling stronger than ever to meet and subdue her apollyon, she pinned the note inside her frock, as a shield and a reminder, lest she be taken unaware, and proceeded to open her other letter, quite ready for either good or bad news. brooke sent a bulletin every day, and as the head of the family, meg insisted on reading the dispatches, which grew more cheerful as the week passed. neither spoke. “the coolness of you two rascals is amazing,” began mr. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™ electronic works 1. “oh, beth, if you should be sick i never could forgive myself! what shall we do?” “don’t be frightened, i guess i shan’t have it badly. if it is a feminine delusion, leave us to enjoy it while we may, for without it half the beauty and the romance of life is lost, and sorrowful forebodings would embitter all our hopes of the brave, tenderhearted little lads, who still love their mothers better than themselves and are not ashamed to own it. she felt so ill one day that she told jo she wanted to give her piano to meg, her cats to you, and the poor old doll to jo, who would love it for her sake. ) “all of this will be expensive, amy. “spiders and rice pudding. “it’s so dreadful to be poor!” sighed meg, looking down at her old dress. “we’ll never draw that curtain any more, and i give you leave to look as much as you like. no one ate much, but everyone looked very happy, and the old room seemed to brighten up amazingly when the first romance of the family began there. they talked over the new plan while old hannah cleared the table, then out came the four little work baskets, and the needles flew as the girls made sheets for aunt march. “i don’t. ” “have someone come and see you then. while jo trudged beside him, feeling as if her place had always been there, and wondering how she ever could have chosen any other lot. ” so meg reclined, with rubbers well hidden, and jo went blundering away to the dining room, which she found after going into a china closet, and opening the door of a room where old mr. “yes, miss, but i don’t believe he’s seeable just yet. “yesterday, when aunt was asleep and i was trying to be as still as a mouse, polly began to squall and flap about in his cage, so i went to let him out, and found a big spider there. march glanced at jo as she spoke, but the face opposite seemed quite unconscious of any secret disquietude but beth’s, and after sewing thoughtfully for a minute, jo said, “i think she is growing up, and so begins to dream dreams, and have hopes and fears and fidgets, without knowing why or being able to explain them. tudor?” asked amy, wisely refraining from any comment upon jo’s dilapidated appearance. have you got your thick boots on, and something warm under your cloak?” “i believe so,” answered jo absently. i should have shut the door in his face if he had,” said jo, settling herself on the floor at her mother’s feet. what can there be in a simple little story like that to make people praise it so?” she said, quite bewildered. ” “what makes you think so, mother?” “she sits alone a good deal, and doesn’t talk to her father as much as she used. if we do so, you just say to us, as old chloe did in _uncle tom_, ‘tink ob yer marcies, chillen!’ ‘tink ob yer marcies!’” added jo, who could not, for the life of her, help getting a morsel of fun out of the little sermon, though she took it to heart as much as any of them. ” beth’s bundle was such a funny one that everybody wanted to laugh, but nobody did, for it would have hurt her feelings very much. i dare not tell your parents yet, but i think they would consent if they knew that we adored one another. mr. “what shall we do with that girl? she never _will_ behave like a young lady,” sighed meg, as she watched the race with a disapproving face. “do you know i like this room most of all in my baby house,” added meg, a minute after, as they went upstairs and she looked into her well-stored linen closet. “i ought to be satisfied to please grandfather, and i do try, but it’s working against the grain, you see, and comes hard. she always felt wicked after it, for the pretty things were seldom necessaries, but then they cost so little, it wasn’t worth worrying about, so the trifles increased unconsciously, and in the shopping excursions she was no longer a passive looker-on. the front door usually stood hospitably open. i often feel as if i needed teaching more than ever since these babies look to me for everything. franz and emil are jolly little lads, quite after my own heart, for the mixture of german and american spirit in them produces a constant state of effervescence. ” there she stopped, with a look that had both pain and pity in it. the lake seemed to wash away the troubles of the past, and the grand old mountains to look benignly down upon them saying, “little children, love one another. you’ve improved immensely since then, and i congratulate you. ” “like it? it is more sweet to me than i can tell. march with her usual question, “any letter from father, girls?” and laurie to say in his persuasive way, “won’t some of you come for a drive? i’ve been working away at mathematics till my head is in a muddle, and i’m going to freshen my wits by a brisk turn. “i like good strong words that mean something,” replied jo, catching her hat as it took a leap off her head preparatory to flying away altogether. “ours, of course. ” and he waved his hands, as if words failed to express his admiration. they say no when they mean yes, and drive a man out of his wits just for the fun of it,” returned laurie, entrenching himself behind an undeniable fact. amy does well without frettin, wearin her best clothes and eatin sweet stuff. may i take it to your sister?” “oh, thank you! i’ll show you where she is. “no sooner do we get out of one trouble than down comes another. nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the united states. he knows what will sell, and we don’t. she had seen her old friend in a new light, not as ‘our boy’, but as a handsome and agreeable man, and she was conscious of a very natural desire to find favor in his sight. ” “do you say she makes a good living out of stories like this?” and jo looked more respectfully at the agitated group and thickly sprinkled exclamation points that adorned the page. “i shall come every day, father, and expect to keep my old place in all your hearts, though i am married. hoping to impress the lesson more deeply, mrs. bhaer, continuing to confess the young sinner, who stood upon the knee, exploring the waistcoat pocket. good-by, good-by!” they stood watching her, with faces full of love and hope and tender pride as she walked away, leaning on her husband’s arm, with her hands full of flowers and the june sunshine brightening her happy face—and so meg’s married life began. but young as she was, jo had learned that hearts, like flowers, cannot be rudely handled, but must open naturally, so though she believed she knew the cause of beth’s new pain, she only said, in her tenderest tone, “does anything trouble you, deary?” “yes, jo,” after a long pause. ” and jo dropped down beside the bed in a passion of penitent tears, telling all that had happened, bitterly condemning her hardness of heart, and sobbing out her gratitude for being spared the heavy punishment which might have come upon her. laurence, asking me to come over and play to him tonight, before the lamps are lighted, and i shall go,” added beth, whose friendship with the old gentleman prospered finely. “you don’t really think i am such a mercenary creature as i tried to be once, do you? it would break my heart if you didn’t believe that i’d gladly pull in the same boat with you, even if you had to get your living by rowing on the lake. march whispered back, with a loving look at the worn face and gray head beside him. go and make yourself useful, since you are too big to be ornamental. march gave the mother tea and gruel, and comforted her with promises of help, while she dressed the little baby as tenderly as if it had been her own. ” “i’m afraid it won’t. “suppose we take her. kirke welcomed me so kindly i felt at home at once, even in that big house full of strangers. ” whispered her neighbor, a young lady of great presence of mind. i shall row and tramp about, so i don’t want any starch to think of. turning as from a fallen idol, she made other discoveries which rapidly dispelled her romantic illusions. i’d like to wear them mother, can i?” “they are very pretty, but i think you’re rather too young for such ornaments, amy,” said mrs. “no, sir. it was not far to longmeadow, but the tent was pitched and the wickets down by the time they arrived. now, demi, make the letter and tell its name. there shall be no flurry, no scolding, no discomfort, but a neat house, a cheerful wife, and a good dinner. this was a truly thrilling scene, though some persons might have thought that the sudden tumbling down of a quantity of long red hair rather marred the effect of the villain’s death. he never goes with flo, always gets on my side of the carriage, table, or promenade, looks sentimental when we are alone, and frowns at anyone else who ventures to speak to me. stop a bit. “if i can manage the young one, i can the old one,” muttered jo, as she walked away, leaving laurie bent over a railroad map with his head propped up on both hands. meg says i may, and if i pay for myself, laurie hasn’t anything to do with it. amy’s nature was growing sweeter, deeper, and more tender. “a friend of mine desired me to offer—a story—just as an experiment—would like your opinion—be glad to write more if this suits. a cluster of grave yet cheerful pansies on a deeper purple ground was pronounced very appropriate and pretty, and beth worked away early and late, with occasional lifts over hard parts. march to smile and slip away, well pleased with the success of her suggestion. ” “grandpa sent it. brooke’s mouth as he opened at poor mary’s lament. so he patiently broke twig after twig till he had made a little hole through which he peeped, saying imploringly, ‘let me in! let me in!’ but the pretty princess did not seem to understand, for she picked her roses quietly, and left him to fight his way in. tell away, jo, and don’t be afraid. he did not soon forget the reproachful glance amy gave him, as she went, without a word to anyone, straight into the anteroom, snatched her things, and left the place “forever,” as she passionately declared to herself. i’ll take that. march surveyed the young couple with such tender satisfaction that it was perfectly evident aunt march was right in calling them as ‘unworldly as a pair of babies’. you shan’t stir a step, so you may just stay where you are,” scolded jo, crosser than ever, having just pricked her finger in her hurry. “good afternoon. i don’t offer to take it myself, for i should only get into another scrape if i did. her face looked tired, grave, and rather sad, for tomorrow was her birthday, and she was thinking how fast the years went by, how old she was getting, and how little she seemed to have accomplished. sallie had been buying silks, and meg longed for a new one, just a handsome light one for parties, her black silk was so common, and thin things for evening wear were only proper for girls. i haven’t got any mother, you know. 1. ” “she is coming in the spring, and i mean that you shall be all ready to see and enjoy her. i’m busy. ” jo pointed, and laurie sat up to examine, for through an opening in the wood one could look cross the wide, blue river, the meadows on the other side, far over the outskirts of the great city, to the green hills that rose to meet the sky. laurence in the twilight, laurie, standing in the shadow of the curtain, listened to the little david, whose simple music always quieted his moody spirit, and watched the old man, who sat with his gray head on his hand, thinking tender thoughts of the dead child he had loved so much. you’ve behaved sweetly, and i respect you with all my heart,” said jo warmly, as they brushed their hair together late that night. but, while apparently amusing themselves in the most careless fashion, they were half-consciously making discoveries and forming opinions about each other. fearing to betray herself, she slipped away, murmuring something about needing more paper. i’ve wanted it so long. i don’t mind saying that i don’t approve of tudor any more than you do, but i’m not called upon to tell him so. ” “oh, dear!” sighed amy, “now she’s in a contrary fit, and will drive me distracted before i can get her properly ready. at first they played keep-house, and frolicked over it like children. at the back of his chair she stopped and stood listening, with her great eyes wide open and her cheeks red with excitement of this unusual performance. as spring came on, a new set of amusements became the fashion, and the lengthening days gave long afternoons for work and play of all sorts. amy was in her element now, and out of gratitude, if nothing more, was as spritely and gracious as possible, coming to the conclusion, about that time, that virtue was its own reward, after all. brooke didn’t even say, “thank you,” but as he stooped for the unromantic tool, he kissed his little bride behind the folding door, with a look that made aunt march whisk out her pocket handkerchief with a sudden dew in her sharp old eyes. ” “your parents, my dear, have no more worldly wisdom than a pair of babies. “marriage is an excellent thing, after all. ” “you can’t live on friends, try it and see how cool they’ll grow. amy’s nose still afflicted her, for it never would grow grecian, so did her mouth, being too wide, and having a decided chin. org. viola and angelo are two of our favorite names, isn’t that queer?” said meg, wiping her eyes, for the lovering part was tragical. “‘i don’t understand what it’s all about. neither are you, and there is no use in making yourself disagreeable because he is. i’m interested in other people’s experiences and inconsistencies, and though i can’t explain, i remember and use them for my own benefit. “he’s been starved, and he shan’t be baked now he’s dead. ” “i didn’t know that, he forgot, i suppose, and, as your grandpa was poorly, i didn’t like to worry him by asking, though i did want some. she brought so much love, energy, and cheerfulness to the work that she could not but succeed, in spite of some obstacles. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed: this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. he was not very wise, but very good-natured, and altogether an excellent person to carry on a picnic. it would be a glorious joke. “and i to see miss marsch, but no, you haf a party,” and the professor paused as the sound of voices and the tap of dancing feet came down to them. i’ll talk all day if you’ll only set me going. “didn’t you drop the other in the garden?” “no, i’m sure i didn’t, for there was only one in the office. ” then the professor thanked him so heartily, and looked so suddenly illuminated with satisfaction, that laurie thought him the most delightfully demonstrative old fellow he ever met. i give you leave,” returned laurie, who enjoyed having someone to tease, after his long abstinence from his favorite pastime. she told no one, but concocted a ‘thrilling tale’, and boldly carried it herself to mr. “you may have it, you may! only don’t stain it, and do behave nicely. ” what good times they had, to be sure. amy came out so strong on this occasion that i think the good thoughts in the little chapel really began to bear fruit. the gruff tones of hugo’s voice, with an occasional shout when his feelings overcame him, were very impressive, and the audience applauded the moment he paused for breath. that will amuse us and keep you out of mischief,” said amy in her most grown-up tone. how could you be so rude, so mean, and cruel to us both?” jo hardly heard her, for she and her mother were reading the note, which was written in a peculiar hand. i saw you. ” “i never shall forgive you,” was jo’s stern answer, and from that moment she ignored amy entirely. at sunset the tent was struck, hampers packed, wickets pulled up, boats loaded, and the whole party floated down the river, singing at the tops of their voices. there was a good deal of laughing and kissing and explaining, in the simple, loving fashion which makes these home festivals so pleasant at the time, so sweet to remember long afterward, and then all fell to work. laurence laughed till they thought he’d have an apoplectic fit. the evenings were the worst of all, for aunt march fell to telling long stories about her youth, which were so unutterably dull that amy was always ready to go to bed, intending to cry over her hard fate, but usually going to sleep before she had squeezed out more than a tear or two. “let me stay with him, he’ll be good now, john. you do try to fight off your shyness, and i love you for it. a return to clay and plaster followed, and ghostly casts of her acquaintances haunted corners of the house, or tumbled off closet shelves onto people’s heads. “how could i after all the fuss?” began may, but she did not finish, for amy’s voice came across the hall, saying pleasantly. bhaer laughed his sonorous laugh, and jo cried out, with a scandalized face. but, beth, i don’t give up yet. i advise you to be off as soon as you can, for scarlet fever is no joke, miss. ” “mothers are the best lovers in the world, but i don’t mind whispering to marmee that i’d like to try all kinds. i brought authors, and i dare say miss kate knows something new and nice. ” and mr. demi, go upstairs, and get into your bed, as mamma bids you. it is natural to think of it, meg, right to hope and wait for it, and wise to prepare for it, so that when the happy time comes, you may feel ready for the duties and worthy of the joy. although the oldest, jo had the least self-control, and had hard times trying to curb the fiery spirit which was continually getting her into trouble. “no, i shall!” cried amy. while the cooking mania lasted she went through mrs. “that reminds me,” said meg, “that i’ve got something to tell. ’” “there’s no need for me to say it, for everyone can see that i’m far happier than i deserve,” added jo, glancing from her good husband to her chubby children, tumbling on the grass beside her. “now then, we must walk her home as fast as we can. such walks on deck, such sunsets, such splendid air and waves! it was almost as exciting as riding a fast horse, when we went rushing on so grandly. brooke was a grave, silent young man, with handsome brown eyes and a pleasant voice. dashwood was alone, whereat she rejoiced. for i’m shut up in my study at the other end of the house, laurie is out a great deal, and the servants are never near the drawing room after nine o’clock. so he was going at once on the night train and only had time to say good-by. laurence, who had been longing to lend the lovers a hand, but knew that they would refuse his help. ” her family and friends administered comfort and commendation liberally. she was the weaker then, and beth tried to comfort and sustain her, with her arms about her and the soothing words she whispered in her ear. i can’t get a word from him, and when i threatened to shake the truth out of him he bolted upstairs and locked himself into his room. i don’t care what becomes of anybody but you, beth. “where have you been, and what are you hiding behind you?” asked meg, surprised to see, by her hood and cloak, that lazy amy had been out so early. besides, you owe something to john as well as to the babies. bhaer’s room where she was rummaging. bhaer was a diffident man and slow to offer his own opinions, not because they were unsettled, but too sincere and earnest to be lightly spoken. “she has sold everything she had that was worth selling, and now she is enjoying herself. “there is something more, i think. “prut! thou beginnest early. the poor man was very uncomfortable, for the children had bereft him of his wife, home was merely a nursery and the perpetual ‘hushing’ made him feel like a brutal intruder whenever he entered the sacred precincts of babyland. it was a most unfortunate moment for denouncing amy, and jenny knew it. it’s our day for a letter, and the postman hasn’t been. i should rather enjoy the brickbats and hooting, i think. “and i’ve succeeded beyond my hopes, for here you are, a steady, sensible businessman, doing heaps of good with your money, and laying up the blessings of the poor, instead of dollars. “unfortunately i have an engagement. “i want to tell you something, mother. if the roof of the house had suddenly flown off, the old gentleman wouldn’t have been more astonished. one forlorn fragment of dollanity had belonged to jo and, having led a tempestuous life, was left a wreck in the rag bag, from which dreary poorhouse it was rescued by beth and taken to her refuge. ” “what are you laughing at? you are up to some mischief, jo,” said laurie, looking mystified. ” “you can put your own things on your own table, if you prefer,” began may, feeling a little conscience-stricken, as she looked at the pretty racks, the painted shells, and quaint illuminations amy had so carefully made and so gracefully arranged. “amy put a blue ribbon on the boy and a pink on the girl, french fashion, so you can always tell. that moffat hasn’t been here, i hope?” asked mrs. moffat said?” asked meg bashfully. amy, who was fond of delicate fare, took a heaping spoonful, choked, hid her face in her napkin, and left the table precipitately. ” there was a simultaneous sigh, which created quite a little gust, as the last hope fled, and the treat was ravished from their longing lips. ” “i did wrong to sigh, jo. you’ll never look finished if you are not careful about the little details, for they make up the pleasing whole. i’m afraid i’m going to have trouble with that boy, it begins to look like it. no! i’ll tell you how we can manage, each wear one good one and carry a bad one. you must take my place, jo, and be everything to father and mother when i’m gone. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. sunshine and laughter were good omens for a pleasure party, and soon a lively bustle began in both houses. “who wrote it?” asked beth, who had caught a glimpse of jo’s face. march as proudly leaned on the arm of ‘my son’. ” but laurie didn’t laugh. ” “meg, dear, be prudent, watch over your sisters, consult hannah, and in any perplexity, go to mr. “hurrah for miss march, the celebrated american authoress!” cried laurie, throwing up his hat and catching it again, to the great delight of two ducks, four cats, five hens, and half a dozen irish children, for they were out of the city now. “i don’t much wonder, poor dear, for you see other girls having splendid times, while you grind, grind, year in and year out. march snatched it, read the two lines it contained, and dropped back into her chair as white as if the little paper had sent a bullet to her heart. there is nothing to eat over there, and the oldest boy came to tell me they were suffering hunger and cold. jo’s desk up here was an old tin kitchen which hung against the wall. as i ain’t, i give my boys, and give ’em free. i’ll be quiet and go to sleep, indeed i will. ” “i think the money is the best part of it. the short afternoon wore away. i never tried it before, and hang me if i ever do again!” added john, with an aggrieved air. mean thing! to go petting papa and helping you, just to wheedle you into liking him. bless you all! ever your loving. ” “begin to do something now by not plaguing his life out,” said meg sharply. john went with me at mr. you shall trudge away, and do your errands in the rain, and if you catch your death and ruin your bonnet, it’s no more than you deserve. march. we should like to know him, and it’s only a proper compliment to you. brooke’s kindness, the prospect of a fine day tomorrow, and the happy times they would have when father came home to be nursed. he must. march mildly observed, “salad was one of the favorite dishes of the ancients, and evelyn. presently he sat up and asked slowly, “do you think jo would despise me as you do?” “yes, if she saw you now. “not at all. “now, jo dear, the chesters consider themselves very elegant people, so i want you to put on your best deportment. “never till i’m stiff and old and have to use a crutch. when little vladimir finally relinquished her, with assurances that he was ‘desolated to leave so early’, she was ready to rest, and see how her recreant knight had borne his punishment. gentlemen, which means boys, be courteous to the old maids, no matter how poor and plain and prim, for the only chivalry worth having is that which is the readiest to pay deference to the old, protect the feeble, and serve womankind, regardless of rank, age, or color. why, mother, beth’s eighteen, but we don’t realize it, and treat her like a child, forgetting she’s a woman. “it will be an immense care for jo,” said meg, stroking the head of her one all-absorbing son. it might have been worse, but amy considered it bad. crinkle, crinkle, ’ittle ’tar, and it had become a household custom, for the mother was a born singer. don’t care if they do. ” “what a good girl you are, amy!” said jo, with a repentant glance from her own damaged costume to that of her sister, which was fresh and spotless still. so meg gave her the easy chair and tried to entertain her, while she asked questions, criticized everything, and told stories of the people whom she knew. beth bouncer will open her new assortment of doll’s millinery next week. “now me mus tuddy my lessin,” went on the funny little thing. “mercy, no! i love the dear boy, as i always have, and am immensely proud of him, but as for anything more, it’s out of the question. his look and silence, as well as a certain inward self-disapproval, ruffled amy, and made her resolve to deliver her lecture without delay. the shaggy eyebrows unbent a little as he rolled the steps toward the shelf where the johnsonian literature was placed. it exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life. somehow, as he talked, the world got right again to jo. come, laurie, promise, and give me one more reason to call this the happiest day of my life. ” “if you’d like to have me, sir. laurence looked so alarming and spoke so sharply that jo would have gladly run away, if she could, but she was perched aloft on the steps, and he stood at the foot, a lion in the path, so she had to stay and brave it out. ” “can you talk french?” “we were not allowed to speak anything else at vevay. ” never had the sun risen so beautifully, and never had the world seemed so lovely as it did to the heavy eyes of meg and jo, as they looked out in the early morning, when their long, sad vigil was done. • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of project gutenberg™ works. when i think of this _deggerredation_, i feel that i can bear even my flat nose and purple gown with yellow sky-rockets on it. ” “you are a thing of beauty and a joy forever,” said jo, looking through her hand with the air of a connoisseur at the blue feather against the golden hair. “no, thank you. “if he shouldn’t love back again, how dreadful it would be. cast away at the very bottom of the table was the professor, shouting answers to the questions of a very inquisitive, deaf old gentleman on one side, and talking philosophy with a frenchman on the other. so you needn’t write touching notes and smile in that insinuating way, for it won’t do a bit of good, and i won’t have it. there are plenty to love you, so try to be satisfied with father and mother, sisters and brothers, friends and babies, till the best lover of all comes to give you your reward. “well, that’s cool,” said laurie to himself, “to have a picnic and never ask me! they can’t be going in the boat, for they haven’t got the key. amy was ordered off at once, and provided with something to ward off danger, she departed in great state, with jo and laurie as escort. among the many pillows that adorned the venerable couch was one, hard, round, covered with prickly horsehair, and furnished with a knobby button at each end. they are not so wild and handsome, but they seem happy, confiding little things. selfish people always like to talk about themselves. i’d no idea hearts could take in so many. the solitary, hungry look in his eyes went straight to jo’s warm heart. ” and off went jo, talking very fast, as she told all about the hummels, in whom her mother had interested richer friends than they were. i’m glad laurie seems so happy and busy, that he has given up smoking and lets his hair grow. laurie devoted himself to the little ones, rode his small daughter in a bushel-basket, took daisy up among the bird’s nests, and kept adventurous rob from breaking his neck. brooke did it, for this isn’t laurie’s writing. 6. seldom except in books do the dying utter memorable words, see visions, or depart with beatified countenances, and those who have sped many parting souls know that to most the end comes as naturally and simply as sleep. so was flo, and we kept bouncing from one side to the other, trying to see everything while we were whisking along at the rate of sixty miles an hour. ” “i’ll make the set of shirts for father, instead of letting you do it, marmee. fortunately the story was _the constant tin soldier_, which is droll, you know, so i could laugh, and i did, though i didn’t understand half he read, for i couldn’t help it, he was so earnest, i so excited, and the whole thing so comical. wouldn’t that be jolly?” “i never had such a fine bouquet before! how pretty it is!” and meg examined her flowers with great interest. aunt march was very angry, for she had set her heart on having her pretty niece make a fine match, and something in the girl’s happy young face made the lonely old woman feel both sad and sour. “how good meg is! come, amy, let’s do as they do. chapter twelve camp laurence beth was postmistress, for, being most at home, she could attend to it regularly, and dearly liked the daily task of unlocking the little door and distributing the mail. make it last as long as you can, for it isn’t very plenty, you know. but it won’t be easy, for it is a dreadful disappointment,” and poor jo bedewed the little fat pincushion she held with several very bitter tears. don’t go away, please, unless you’d rather. but great plans fermented in her busy brain and ambitious mind, and the old tin kitchen in the garret held a slowly increasing pile of blotted manuscript, which was one day to place the name of march upon the roll of fame. meg reasoned, pleaded, and commanded, all in vain. and amy, in her exile, longed eagerly to be at home, that she might work for beth, feeling now that no service would be hard or irksome, and remembering, with regretful grief, how many neglected tasks those willing hands had done for her. her friends repeated the pleasing phrase enthusiastically, and for several minutes she stood, like a jackdaw in the fable, enjoying her borrowed plumes, while the rest chattered like a party of magpies. “i can’t, for i told meg i wouldn’t, because. my rooms are always open to you, and your own shall be as comfortable as i can make it. whatever it was, it simmered to some purpose, for he grew more and more discontented with his desultory life, began to long for some real and earnest work to go at, soul and body, and finally came to the wise conclusion that everyone who loved music was not a composer. laurence sitting in her mother’s lap, as if being made ‘the baby’ again. what shall we do when we can’t eat anymore?” asked laurie, feeling that his trump card had been played when lunch was over. why, jo, your stories are works of shakespeare compared to half the rubbish that is published every day. “they are making a fool of that little girl. you may be sure of that, and though fred is not my model hero, he does very well, and in time i should get fond enough of him if he was very fond of me, and let me do just as i liked. the evergreen arch wouldn’t stay firm after she got it up, but wiggled and threatened to tumble down on her head when the hanging baskets were filled. he read a long debate with the most amiable readiness and then explained it in his most lucid manner, while meg tried to look deeply interested, to ask intelligent questions, and keep her thoughts from wandering from the state of the nation to the state of her bonnet. “what do you want now?” she asked, looking sharply over her spectacles, while the parrot, sitting on the back of her chair, called out. it’s strong and neat, so i ought not to complain, but i know i shall feel ashamed of it beside annie’s silk one with a gold top,” sighed meg, surveying the little umbrella with great disfavor. “laurie, my lad, if you ever want to indulge in this sort of thing, get one of those little girls to help you, and i shall be perfectly satisfied,” said mr. “it must be very disagreeable to sleep in a tent, and eat all sorts of bad-tasting things, and drink out of a tin mug,” sighed amy. everyone greeted him kindly, for jo’s sake at first, but very soon they liked him for his own. ” “why, mother, she has seemed unusually well since the babies came. ” meg went back to toast her feet and read _ivanhoe_, and jo began to dig paths with great energy. hummel told him she was poor, and had tried to cure baby herself, but now it was too late, and she could only ask him to help the others and trust to charity for his pay. “my mother knows old mr. “i follow the good example my neighbors set me,” was laurie’s answer, as he swung himself out of the room. and jo felt as if during that fortnight her sister had grown up amazingly, and was drifting away from her into a world where she could not follow. ” “i can’t do that any more than you could open the watch. taking the shortest way to the boathouse, he waited for them to appear, but no one came, and he went up the hill to take an observation. march, patting her pocket as if she had got a treasure there. laurie dug a grave under the ferns in the grove, little pip was laid in, with many tears by his tender-hearted mistress, and covered with moss, while a wreath of violets and chickweed was hung on the stone which bore his epitaph, composed by jo while she struggled with the dinner. i do like aunt march after all. “daisy, dear, i’ve sent an invitation to your friend, mr. i’m in such a state of exhaustion i can’t get home without help. she was rather surprised, therefore, when the silence remained unbroken, and jo assumed a patronizing air, which decidedly aggravated meg, who in turn assumed an air of dignified reserve and devoted herself to her mother. “i told you so,” said aunt march, with a decided nod to aunt carrol. “i won’t be reasonable. old six-foot snodgrass looms on high, with elephantine grace, and beams upon the company, with brown and jovial face. amy is my chief care now, but her good sense will help her. ” “it’s no harm, jo. now florence’s mama hadn’t a particle of taste, and amy suffered deeply at having to wear a red instead of a blue bonnet, unbecoming gowns, and fussy aprons that did not fit. ” “why, you know i don’t mind hard jobs much, and there must always be one scrub in a family. “gloves are more important than anything else. will you believe it, and go back to the happy old times when we first knew one another?” “i’ll believe it, with all my heart, but, teddy, we never can be boy and girl again. now she won’t feel so bad about leaving him. blurred and blotted, faulty and feeble as the lines were, they brought a look of inexpressible comfort to beth’s face, for her one regret had been that she had done so little, and this seemed to assure her that her life had not been useless, that her death would not bring the despair she feared. was it all self-pity, loneliness, or low spirits? or was it the waking up of a sentiment which had bided its time as patiently as its inspirer? who shall say? chapter forty-three surprises jo was alone in the twilight, lying on the old sofa, looking at the fire, and thinking. i want to hear it, so i can tell beth. ” “it’s a great comfort, jo. yours gratefully, telemachus “good boy! i’m glad he’s gone,” said amy, with an approving smile. march, smiling as if satisfied. there’s a long hall out there, and we can dance grandly, and no one will see us. “there goes the man with the tent! i see mrs. i see the change in you, and you’ll find it in me. now i demand the satisfaction of a gentleman,” and with that the tall uncle proceeded to toss and tousle the small nephew in a way that damaged his philosophical dignity as much as it delighted his boyish soul. “i’ll do my best to gratify you, sir,” was laurie’s unusually dutiful reply, as he carefully unpinned the posy jo had put in his buttonhole. “i let the sun go down on my anger. “that’s the interferingest chap i ever see, but i forgive him and do hope mrs. “out upon you, fie upon you, bold-faced jig!” it was impossible to help laughing at the funny conflict between laurie’s chivalrous reluctance to speak ill of womankind, and his very natural dislike of the unfeminine folly of which fashionable society showed him many samples. ” “well, it does look pleasant, but i can’t learn how it’s done. “i saw you dancing with the red headed man i ran away from. you aren’t woman of the world enough yet to hide your feelings, my dear. ” with that he heaved a great sigh, and then, as if he had discharged his duty to the past, put his feet up on the sofa and enjoyed amy’s letter luxuriously. how could i ask you to gif up so much for a poor old fellow, who has no fortune but a little learning?” “i’m glad you are poor. this was something altogether new, and it proved a grand success, for mrs. but it has blossomed in the night, and now i mean to put it in my vase here, so that when the darling wakes, the first thing she sees will be the little rose, and mother’s face. people who hire all these things done for them never know what they lose, for the homeliest tasks get beautified if loving hands do them, and meg found so many proofs of this that everything in her small nest, from the kitchen roller to the silver vase on her parlor table, was eloquent of home love and tender forethought. “here, ma’am. ” “my dear girl, there was no need of this. “only a little, he’s old for his age, and tall, and can be quite grown-up in his manners if he likes. ” “for what?” “you don’t mean to say you have forgotten that you promised to make half a dozen calls with me today?” “i’ve done a good many rash and foolish things in my life, but i don’t think i ever was mad enough to say i’d make six calls in one day, when a single one upsets me for a week. amy was asked, but jo was not, which was fortunate for all parties, as her elbows were decidedly akimbo at this period of her life, and it took a good many hard knocks to teach her how to get on easily. “susie perkins came to school today with a lovely red carnelian ring. ” “yes, the first love is the best, but be so contented, for i never had another. mrs. davis, feeling that any man possessing a human heart would relent when that delicious perfume met his nose. that is so frenchy. i found that sketch in my portfolio the other day, touched it up, and kept it to show you. ” “ah! thou gifest me such hope and courage, and i haf nothing to gif back but a full heart and these empty hands,” cried the professor, quite overcome. “i had a box of chocolate drops, and the picture i wanted to copy,” said amy, showing her mail. let me be a little girl as long as i can. ” and there jo sighed, as if the prospect was not inviting. “how kind everyone is to us!” she said, turning to find fresh proof of it in the respectful sympathy of the young man’s face. “yes, i remember, but the life i wanted then seems selfish, lonely, and cold to me now. she was _parry_lized with fright, but she went, and oh, what _do_ you think he did? he took her by the ear—the ear! just fancy how horrid!—and led her to the recitation platform, and made her stand there half an hour, holding the slate so everyone could see. amy and you changed places in my heart, that’s all. ” “does i?” and demi’s brown eyes grew big and bright as he took in the new thought. ” “there isn’t anyone i’d like to see. march smile, but she said gravely, “jo, i confide in you and don’t wish you to say anything to meg yet. no, don’t lounge, it makes me nervous. “am i to drag my best dress through the dust, or loop it up, please, ma’am?” “hold it up when you walk, but drop it in the house. amy was learning this distinction through much tribulation, for mistaking enthusiasm for inspiration, she attempted every branch of art with youthful audacity. ” these words came back to meg, as she sat sewing in the sunset, especially the last. “tutors also have rather a hard time of it there, as i know to my sorrow. “i shall, because it’s my fault she is sick. “to the devil!” was the consoling answer. brooke obediently began the story, with the handsome brown eyes steadily fixed upon the sunshiny river. have you? do you hate your boy, and want to fire pillows at him?” anything more wheedlesome than that touching appeal was seldom heard, but jo quenched ‘her boy’ by turning on him with a stern query, “how many bouquets have you sent miss randal this week?” “not one, upon my word. here little, and hereafter bliss, is best from age to age! chapter twenty-three aunt march settles the question like bees swarming after their queen, mother and daughters hovered about mr. ” “i hate my name, too, so sentimental! i wish every one would say jo instead of josephine. but the crowning joke was mr. we can’t agree about that, for you belong to the old set, and i to the new. so quiet and reposeful within, for everyone slept, spent with watching, and a sabbath stillness reigned through the house, while nodding hannah mounted guard at the door. she’s so good, and we all love her so much, i don’t believe god will take her away yet. to jo alone did the shy child tell her thoughts, and over her big harum-scarum sister beth unconsciously exercised more influence than anyone in the family. 8 or 1. adieu, i embrace you tenderly. ” jo’s breath gave out here, and wrapping her head in the paper, she bedewed her little story with a few natural tears, for to be independent and earn the praise of those she loved were the dearest wishes of her heart, and this seemed to be the first step toward that happy end. i often think i should like to, especially since my hair was cut, so if you ever miss us, you may advertise for two boys and look among the ships bound for india. theodore laurence as an honorary member of the p. “only trying to be neighborly, sir. presently he strolled out of the promenade and stood a moment at the crossing, as if undecided whether to go and listen to the band in the jardin publique, or to wander along the beach toward castle hill. laurie, having dutifully gone to college to please his grandfather, was now getting through it in the easiest possible manner to please himself. “don’t lecture any more, there’s a good soul! i have enough all through the week, and like to enjoy myself when i come home. ” “that’s good! i wish all the girls would leave, and spoil his old school. “do your best at college, and when he sees that you try to please him, i’m sure he won’t be hard on you or unjust to you. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1. they began to get anxious, and laurie went off to find her, for no one knew what freak jo might take into her head. he sends all sorts of loving wishes for christmas, and an especial message to you girls,” said mrs. ” and laurie poked the fire to hide a little twitching of the lips that he could not control. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. aren’t you going with him?” “yes, we are. there was an occasional tempest, and once jo marched home, declaring she couldn’t bear it longer, but aunt march always cleared up quickly, and sent for her to come back again with such urgency that she could not refuse, for in her heart she rather liked the peppery old lady. “yes, till i hurt myself. shrouded in a thick veil and armed with a genteel traveling basket, she departed, feeling that a cool drive would soothe her ruffled spirit and fit her for the labors of the day. is it what you call a breakfast cap?” “my dear man, it’s a bonnet! my very best go-to-concert-and-theater bonnet. but he liked it. it will be a great help to have cool, impartial persons take a look at it, and tell me what they think of it. “how well we pull together, don’t we?” said amy, who objected to silence just then. with the first burst of the band, amy’s color rose, her eyes began to sparkle, and her feet to tap the floor impatiently, for she danced well and wanted laurie to know it. ” “he looked like a grasshopper in a fit when he did the new step. “girls, girls, do be quiet one minute! i must get this off by the early mail, and you drive me distracted with your worry,” cried mrs. as friends you are very happy, and your frequent quarrels soon blow over, but i fear you would both rebel if you were mated for life. what the characters of the four sisters were we will leave to be found out. ” mrs. if john had not forgotten all about the jelly, it really would have been unpardonable in him to choose that day, of all the days in the year, to bring a friend home to dinner unexpectedly. then he tried an opera, for nothing seemed impossible in the beginning, but here again unforeseen difficulties beset him. i know all about it. turning to meg, who never refused her anything very long, she said coaxingly, “do tell me! i should think you might let me go, too, for beth is fussing over her piano, and i haven’t got anything to do, and am so lonely. as she came walking in, looking very tired but as composed as ever, she observed that every vestige of the unfortunate fete had disappeared, except a suspicious pucker about the corners of jo’s mouth. when the tea bell rang, jo appeared, looking so grim and unapproachable that it took all amy’s courage to say meekly. “amy and i can’t get on without you, so you must come and teach ‘the children’ to keep house, and go halves in everything, just as we used to do, and let us pet you, and all be blissfully happy and friendly together. “not half so good as yours, mother. she may tear it tonight, and that will be a good excuse for offering a decent one. ” “what old man?” demanded jo, thinking he must mean his grandfather. ” laurie added it, smiling at amy’s last and greatest sacrifice. there, oh there, might i with thee, o, my beloved, go and one listener was so thrilled by the tender invitation that she longed to say she did know the land, and would joyfully depart thither whenever he liked. ” in ten minutes jo came running downstairs with a very red face and the general appearance of a person who had just passed through a trying ordeal of some sort. my letter is only a translation of the german song i wanted. at four o’clock a lull took place, and baskets remained empty, while the apple pickers rested and compared rents and bruises. she gave that funny guard to keep the turquoise on, as it’s too big. “‘charge, chester, charge!’ is the motto for that table, but do your duty like men, and you’ll get your money’s worth of art in every sense of the word,” said the irrepressible jo, as the devoted phalanx prepared to take the field. jo felt as if a veil had fallen between her heart and beth’s, but when she put out her hand to lift it up, there seemed something sacred in the silence, and she waited for beth to speak. has made her plans,” “that fib about her mamma,” and “dowdy tarlaton,” till she was ready to cry and rush home to tell her troubles and ask for advice. ” there are many beths in the world, shy and quiet, sitting in corners till needed, and living for others so cheerfully that no one sees the sacrifices till the little cricket on the hearth stops chirping, and the sweet, sunshiny presence vanishes, leaving silence and shadow behind. he refused to believe it at first, got angry with himself, and couldn’t understand it, but these hearts of ours are curious and contrary things, and time and nature work their will in spite of us. march began to thank mr. “i came to offer myself as escort to your mother. “sir, i give you my word as a gentleman, laurie won’t do anything of the sort. i knew it by the names and the initials, and in it there was one little verse that seemed to call me. “i have a pony at home, and ride nearly every day in the park with fred and kate. ” “i know it cannot, and i don’t fear it any longer, for i’m sure i shall be your beth still, to love and help you more than ever. he does not let business wean him from the little cares and duties that affect us all, and i try not to let domestic worries destroy my interest in his pursuits. “miss march, come to the desk. come and have a cup of coffee all round, and then let’s fall to work and be a credit to the family. you get everything you want out of people. ” “i didn’t mean to, but you looked so funny i really couldn’t help it,” replied meg, passing over the first part of his reproach, for it was quite true that she had shunned him, remembering the moffat party and the talk after it. ” “how sharp you are, marmee, and how silent! you never said a word to me. this suited the young lady better than twilight confidences, tender pressures of the hand, and eloquent glances of the eye, for with jo, brain developed earlier than heart, and she preferred imaginary heroes to real ones, because when tired of them, the former could be shut up in the tin kitchen till called for, and the latter were less manageable. i say, jo, how is grandpa this week? pretty amiable?” “very. nobody knew where the evening went to, for hannah skillfully abstracted the babies at an early hour, nodding like two rosy poppies, and mr. “get what you like, and don’t disturb me. john brooke, with the maker’s congratulations and compliments. some people seemed to get all sunshine, and some all shadow. almost twenty-five, and nothing to show for it. ” “i didn’t promise. laurie reached the goal first and was quite satisfied with the success of his treatment, for his atlanta came panting up with flying hair, bright eyes, ruddy cheeks, and no signs of dissatisfaction in her face. he thought she was just perfect, and talked about it for days and days, and went on about you all in flaming style. couldn’t we invent a rich relation, who shall obligingly die out there in germany, and leave him a tidy little fortune?” said laurie, when they began to pace up and down the long drawing room, arm in arm, as they were fond of doing, in memory of the chateau garden. as the president finished reading the paper (which i beg leave to assure my readers is a bona fide copy of one written by bona fide girls once upon a time), a round of applause followed, and then mr. “you’ve kept close to that starched-up englishwoman all day, and now you snub me. gardiner’s dressing room after a prolonged prink. e. neither silk, lace, nor orange flowers would she have. amy, though the youngest, was a most important person, in her own opinion at least. “she took it out a minute ago, and went off with it to put a ribbon on it, or some such notion,” replied jo, dancing about the room to take the first stiffness off the new army slippers. what do you down here, my friend?” “i’m shopping. ” “tell me all about it. he rather missed the ‘petting’ he used to receive, and enjoyed a taste of it again, for no attentions, however flattering, from strangers, were half so pleasant as the sisterly adoration of the girls at home. something rushed swiftly by her, and laurie’s voice cried out. zara replied and, after a musical dialogue, consented to fly. ” “a ravishingly lovely lady, who exclaimed, with a cry of rapture, ‘at last! at last!’” continued kate, who had read french novels, and admired the style. you say nothing about your trials, failures, or successes, and think, perhaps, that no one sees them but the friend whose help you daily ask, if i may trust the well-worn cover of your guidebook. he looked sober in spite of his humming, till he went to the window to turn the hyacinth bulbs toward the sun, and stroke the cat, who received him like an old friend. m. ” she leaned her forehead on the cool pane, and stood half hidden by the curtains, never minding that her favorite waltz had begun, till some one touched her, and turning, she saw laurie, looking penitent, as he said, with his very best bow and his hand out. is my sash right? and does my hair look very bad?” said meg, as she turned from the glass in mrs. chapter twenty-nine calls “come, jo, it’s time. but he followed, asking with an air of sympathy, “did you have a bad time?” “not very. brooke,” said kate, with a commanding air, which surprised meg, who treated the tutor with as much respect as any other gentleman. “what virtues do you most admire in a man?” asked sallie. “the dirt is picturesque, so i don’t mind. sallie had urged her to do it, had offered to lend the money, and with the best intentions in life had tempted meg beyond her strength. shall i not go and say, ‘if this is not too poor a thing to gif for what i shall hope to receive, take it in gott’s name?’” “and so you came to find that it was not too poor, but the one precious thing i needed,” whispered jo. he fled at once, and the minute it was well, “up with the bonnets of bonnie dundee,” she slipped away to return no more till the young gentleman departed in high dudgeon. ” “thank you. i took four lessons, and then i stuck fast in a grammatical bog. she did not rebuke jo with saintly speeches, only loved her better for her passionate affection, and clung more closely to the dear human love, from which our father never means us to be weaned, but through which he draws us closer to himself. i’ll tell you by-and-by. jo knew nothing about philosophy or metaphysics of any sort, but a curious excitement, half pleasurable, half painful, came over her as she listened with a sense of being turned adrift into time and space, like a young balloon out on a holiday. “wouldn’t it comfort you to tell me what it is?” “not now, not yet. “now tell me what brought you, at last, just when i wanted you?” “this,” and mr. “good evening, miss jo. march, to attempt consolation or offer sympathy. she enjoyed it heartily and found the applause of her boys more satisfying than any praise of the world, for now she told no stories except to her flock of enthusiastic believers and admirers. i’ve got money enough. i wish he’d love beth, perhaps he may in time, but i begin to think i was mistaken about her. so it naturally fell out that meg got into the way of gadding and gossiping with her friend. it’s dreadful, but i can’t scold him. “have you anything interesting there?” asked meg, with condescension. beth could not reason upon or explain the faith that gave her courage and patience to give up life, and cheerfully wait for death. “perhaps it was wrong, but i tried to do right. i only thought jo was encouraging you in a feeling which you’d be sorry for by-and-by. “mother likes to have us out-of-doors as much as possible, so we bring our work here and have nice times. it was so droll! for when we were shut in by the wooden apron, the man drove so fast that flo was frightened, and told me to stop him, but he was up outside behind somewhere, and i couldn’t get at him. ” but neither bent the knee, for the young bridegroom replied in a tone that startled all listeners as the mask fell, disclosing the noble face of ferdinand devereux, the artist lover, and leaning on the breast where now flashed the star of an english earl was the lovely viola, radiant with joy and beauty. ” amy spoke bitterly, and turned her back on the exasperating martyr at her feet. lamb turned an approving glance upon amy, wondering what his mother could be saying to make the girl look so red and uncomfortable. crosspatch, draw the latch, sit by the fire and spin, squalled polly, bending down from his perch on the back of her chair to peep into jo’s face, with such a comical air of impertinent inquiry that it was impossible to help laughing. it’s like other people, you know, and i always envy girls who do such things, i’m so fond of luxury,” said meg, trying to decide which of two shabby gowns was the least shabby. money, position, fashionable accomplishments, and elegant manners were most desirable things in her eyes, and she liked to associate with those who possessed them, often mistaking the false for the true, and admiring what was not admirable. i can’t rest till i get hold of him. don’t cry. “and such lovely weather, i’m so glad of that,” added beth, tidily sorting neck and hair ribbons in her best box, lent for the great occasion. they could not help it, for he carried the talisman that opens all hearts, and these simple people warmed to him at once, feeling even the more friendly because he was poor. i thought you’d got over the dandy period, but every now and then it breaks out in a new spot. i can go anywhere, do anything,” he said, looking ready to fly to the ends of the earth. i had all my girls to comfort me at home, and his last son was waiting, miles away, to say good-by to him, perhaps! i felt so rich, so happy thinking of my blessings, that i made him a nice bundle, gave him some money, and thanked him heartily for the lesson he had taught me. he only wanted our leave to love her and work for her, and the right to make her love him if he could. “there, i’ve done my best! if this won’t suit i shall have to wait till i can do better. ” amy started, and put both hands behind her, turning on him an imploring look which pleaded for her better than the words she could not utter. so each week beheld some fresh absurdity. if beth had wanted any reward, she found it in the bright little faces always turned up to her window, with nods and smiles, and the droll little letters which came to her, full of blots and gratitude. “all right, show her up, it’s miss jo,” said laurie, going to the door of his little parlor to meet jo, who appeared, looking rosy and quite at her ease, with a covered dish in one hand and beth’s three kittens in the other. then i’d do what i have often proposed, let hannah come and help you. ” “laurie laurence, what an odd name. she knew that little ted would turn up again in time, safe and rosy, dirty and serene, and she always received him back with a hearty welcome, for jo loved her babies tenderly. “mother, why didn’t mr. by-and-by we shall take turns, for marriage, they say, halves one’s rights and doubles one’s duties. chapter forty-two all alone it was easy to promise self-abnegation when self was wrapped up in another, and heart and soul were purified by a sweet example. you are not like your old self a bit, and seem ever so far away from me. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at www. “beth, if you don’t keep these horrid cats down cellar i’ll have them drowned,” exclaimed meg angrily as she tried to get rid of the kitten which had scrambled up her back and stuck like a burr just out of reach. ” “i want to, oh, so much! i try, but every day i lose a little, and feel more sure that i shall never gain it back. annie moffat’s foolish lessons in coquetry came into her mind, and the love of power, which sleeps in the bosoms of the best of little women, woke up all of a sudden and took possession of her. when they went back to be kissed and cuddled by faithful hannah, they found beth lying, as she used to do, with her cheek pillowed on her hand, the dreadful pallor gone, and breathing quietly, as if just fallen asleep. when he was gone, amy, who had been pensive all evening, said suddenly, as if busy over some new idea, “is laurie an accomplished boy?” “yes, he has had an excellent education, and has much talent. “i’ll take a leaf out of her book, and try not only to seem glad, but to be so, and not grudge her one minute of happiness. do it this minute, sir!” commanded jo, fearing he might propose a proxy. ” “good girl! you deserve to go, and i’m sure you will some day,” said aunt march, with an approving pat on the head, as amy picked up her ball for her. bhaer, taking teddy’s little fist out of the milk pitcher, in which he was rapturously churning. ” “i did fail, say what you will, for jo wouldn’t love me,” began laurie, leaning his head on his hand in a despondent attitude. he only looked down a minute, and the expression of his face puzzled jo when he said very gently, “never mind that. “you’d be angry in five minutes. behold ambition on his brow, and on his nose, a blot. “i’ll come if i’m at the ends of the earth, for the sight of jo’s face alone on that occasion would be worth a long journey. jo, go and get dr. i don’t like reformers, and i hope you never try to be one. “did you believe that i should go with no farewell to those who haf been so heavenly kind to me?” he asked so reproachfully that she felt as if she had insulted him by the suggestion, and answered heartily. i wish i could. mother and sisters gathered close, as if loath to give meg up. i know i’m a silly little girl, and i’ll stay with you till i’m fit to take care of myself. “you’ll have a splitting headache tomorrow, if you drink much of that. both tone and shadow struck amy, for she had seen and heard them before, and now she looked up in time to catch a new expression on laurie’s face—a hard bitter look, full of pain, dissatisfaction, and regret. laurence’s cherry-bounce. ” feeling very much ruffled, she went and stood at a quiet window to cool her cheeks, for the tight dress gave her an uncomfortably brilliant color. march gently nodded her head and asked, rather abruptly, if he wouldn’t like to have something to eat. “yes, very selfish,” continued amy, in a calm, cool voice, twice as effective just then as an angry one. the old gentleman sends heaps of things, and is rather wearin, but means wal, and it aint my place to say nothin. with tears and prayers and tender hands, mother and sisters made her ready for the long sleep that pain would never mar again, seeing with grateful eyes the beautiful serenity that soon replaced the pathetic patience that had wrung their hearts so long, and feeling with reverent joy that to their darling death was a benignant angel, not a phantom full of dread. “now, gentlemen, i want you to go and do your duty by the other tables as generously as you have by mine, especially the art table,” she said, ordering out ‘teddy’s own’, as the girls called the college friends. the windows were open, and jo, walking in the garden with beth, for once understood music better than her sister, for he played the ‘_sonata pathetique_’, and played it as he never did before. mr. my silk stockings and two pairs of new gloves are my comfort. i’ll keep you in spite of everything. “yes, i do, but you’d better wait till you are through college, on the whole, and be fitting yourself for the place meantime. ” “you really think so, mother?” “i know it, meg, for i’ve tried it, and i seldom give advice unless i’ve proved its practicability. ” “then you don’t care for him in the way it is evident he begins to care for you?” and mrs. i don’t pretend to be wise, but i am observing, and i see a great deal more than you’d imagine. hannah ‘felt in her bones’ that it was going to be an unusually fine day, and she proved herself a true prophetess, for everybody and everything seemed bound to produce a grand success. come to me if anything goes wrong, and be as happy as you can. “is amy’s illumination anywhere about? i took a fancy to buy that for father,” said jo, very anxious to learn the fate of her sister’s work. though decidedly shaken by the fall from the tower upon him, roderigo defied the old gentleman and refused to stir. he looked so wistful as he went away, hearing the frolic and evidently having none of his own. it must be confessed that the artist sometimes got possession of the woman, and indulged in antique coiffures, statuesque attitudes, and classic draperies. ‘will you give me a rose?’ said he. ” “why didn’t you go into the kitchen and make messes, as sallie says she does to amuse herself, though they never turn out well and the servants laugh at her,” said meg. bhaer was going away, he only cared for her as a friend, it was all a mistake, and the sooner it was over the better. “please don’t. no one said a word about it, but sallie offered to dress her hair, and annie to tie her sash, and belle, the engaged sister, praised her white arms. laurence’s business detains him near you so long, since he is so useful to you and father. i called at your hotel, but you were out. he was delighted, inquired who lived in this old castle, and was told that several captive princesses were kept there by a spell, and spun all day to lay up money to buy their liberty. i’m not like the rest of you. since the party, she had been more eager than ever, and had planned many ways of making friends with him, but he had not been seen lately, and jo began to think he had gone away, when she one day spied a brown face at an upper window, looking wistfully down into their garden, where beth and amy were snow-balling one another. ” “but it can’t be right for him to neglect me. “no, we haven’t, only the family. i never, never should have got over such a agonizing mortification. ’ i couldn’t help laughing, which made poll swear, and aunt woke up and scolded us both. “it’s evident he doesn’t look in his glass before coming down,” thought jo, with a smile, as he said “goot efening,” and sat soberly down, quite unconscious of the ludicrous contrast between his subject and his headgear, for he was going to read her the death of wallenstein. march’s face, and stood twirling his hat with a guilty air which convicted him at once. the person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. “i wish it was christmas or new year’s all the time. i’m going, so you needn’t try to preach propriety, for you can’t do it, jo. c below. six children are huddled into one bed to keep from freezing, for they have no fire. she was standing before a fine portrait of the old gentleman when the door opened again, and without turning, she said decidedly, “i’m sure now that i shouldn’t be afraid of him, for he’s got kind eyes, though his mouth is grim, and he looks as if he had a tremendous will of his own. it is so pleasant that we spend our evenings talking there when too tired with our day’s work to go out. “all in favor of this motion please to manifest it by saying, ‘aye’. no one could resist her persuasive nods, or the fragrant invitation issuing from the nose of the coffee pot. ” “if mademoiselle was a catholic, she would find true comfort, but as that is not to be, it would be well if you went apart each day to meditate and pray, as did the good mistress whom i served before madame. for the drops continued to fall, and being a woman as well as a lover, she felt that, though it was too late to save her heart, she might her bonnet. he’s been through so many little trials of the sort, he’s used to it, and will soon get over his lovelornity. won’t that be better than moping here?” “i don’t wish to be sent off as if i was in the way,” began amy, in an injured voice. northbury her model, jo rashly took a plunge into the frothy sea of sensational literature, but thanks to the life preserver thrown her by a friend, she came up again not much the worse for her ducking. mr. “please don’t plague me, jo, i’ve told you i don’t care much about him, and there isn’t to be anything said, but we are all to be friendly, and go on as before. there are many americans there, and they give it in honor of the day. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. “yankees are a deal the most tricky, everybody knows. “you said the other day that you’d be perfectly happy if you could only go to annie moffat’s,” observed beth in her quiet way. much against her will, jo at length consented to sacrifice a day to mrs. ” laurie did not utter the words, but he thought them, and the next instant kissed the little old ring, saying to himself, “no, i won’t! i haven’t forgotten, i never can. “not in the least. the conversations were miles beyond jo’s comprehension, but she enjoyed it, though kant and hegel were unknown gods, the subjective and objective unintelligible terms, and the only thing ‘evolved from her inner consciousness’ was a bad headache after it was all over. it’s a shame!” seeing meg’s usually gentle temper was roused and her pride hurt by this mischievous joke, mrs. but jo had her own eyes to take care of, and feeling that they could not be trusted, she prudently kept them on the little sock she was knitting, like a model maiden aunt. the war is over, and mr. aunt mary got me some new things, for i came off in such a hurry i wasn’t half ready. daisy, who was fond of going about peddling kisses, lost her best customer and became bankrupt. so they did, but their mistake was in ceasing to do well, and they learned this lesson through much anxiety and regret. “i hate to think i’ve got to grow up, and be miss march, and wear long gowns, and look as prim as a china aster! it’s bad enough to be a girl, anyway, when i like boy’s games and work and manners! i can’t get over my disappointment in not being a boy. chapter thirty-eight on the shelf in france the young girls have a dull time of it till they are married, when ‘vive la liberte!’ becomes their motto. let’s do it, jo. once, when he remembered jo as she sat with the little child in her lap and that new softness in her face, he leaned his head on his hands a minute, and then roamed about the room, as if in search of something that he could not find. come down and go on being neighborly. it was fortunate that tea was at hand, to produce a lull and provide refreshment—for they would have been hoarse and faint if they had gone on much longer. meg was asked at once, and the tight slippers tripped about so briskly that none would have guessed the pain their wearer suffered smilingly. he had carried it off as a good joke with scott, excused his little wife as well as he could, and played the host so hospitably that his friend enjoyed the impromptu dinner, and promised to come again, but john was angry, though he did not show it, he felt that meg had deserted him in his hour of need. when aunt spoke to me the other day, she regretted your blunt manners and too independent spirit, and here she writes, as if quoting something you had said—‘i planned at first to ask jo, but as ‘favors burden her’, and she ‘hates french’, i think i won’t venture to invite her. “now then, vote again. kirke, but as she is short and i’m tall, my efforts at concealment were rather a failure. however, we don’t mean to stay long, so it’s no great matter. but the pain increased as politics absorbed john, who was always running over to discuss interesting points with scott, quite unconscious that meg missed him. jo wouldn’t be put into the opera at any price, and he had to give her up with a “bless that girl, what a torment she is!” and a clutch at his hair, as became a distracted composer. there was color, light, and life in the boy’s face now, vivacity in his manner, and genuine merriment in his laugh. i wouldn’t forgive her, and today, if it hadn’t been for laurie, it might have been too late! how could i be so wicked?” said jo, half aloud, as she leaned over her sister softly stroking the wet hair scattered on the pillow. both peeped and criticized and chatted till they felt like old acquaintances. “pretty well, thanks to aunt march, who lets esther talk to me as often as i like,” replied amy, with a grateful look, which caused the old lady to smile affably. she turned the page and her head at the same time, pointing to the sum which would have been bad enough without the fifty, but which was appalling to her with that added. ” and meg offered her hand with a gesture both affectionate and timid. the garden and orchard alone need two or three men, and farming isn’t in bhaer’s line, i take it. ” “is she? by jupiter, i will, if i only get the chance!” cried laurie, sitting up with sudden energy. ” amy rose to comply with outward composure, but a secret fear oppressed her, for the limes weighed upon her conscience. when i lost sight of father’s dear old face, i felt a trifle blue, and might have shed a briny drop or two, if an irish lady with four small children, all crying more or less, hadn’t diverted my mind, for i amused myself by dropping gingerbread nuts over the seat every time they opened their mouths to roar. davis says,” retorted amy, finishing jo with her latin. ” “that’s the fun of it,” began laurie, who had got a willful fit on him and was possessed to break out of bounds in some way. ” “it’s well enough for me to go out with laurie, but not well enough to go to the hummels’,” said jo, laughing, but looking a little ashamed of her inconsistency. may i?” “i don’t promise to answer. if you will believe me, she went and knocked at the study door before she gave herself time to think, and when a gruff voice called out, “come in!” she did go in, right up to mr. when you and jo were little, i went on just as you are, feeling as if i didn’t do my duty unless i devoted myself wholly to you. “now, teddy, i want to talk seriously to you about tomorrow,” began jo, as they strolled away together. when they rose she proposed to go, but laurie said he had something more to show her, and took her away to the conservatory, which had been lighted for her benefit. “tell us about it. ” and laurie sat down with a submissive expression delightful to behold. and it’s worse than ever now, for i’m dying to go and fight with papa. amy chirped like a cricket, and jo wandered through the airs at her own sweet will, always coming out at the wrong place with a croak or a quaver that spoiled the most pensive tune. “but on my honor, i never will do so again, and henceforth devote myself to the interest of this immortal club. two easy chairs stood side by side at the head of the table, in which sat beth and her father, feasting modestly on chicken and a little fruit. “i’ll come, teddy, rain or shine, and march before you, playing ‘hail the conquering hero comes’ on a jew’s-harp. so i’ve been turning the matter over in my mind the last week, for it was impossible to help seeing that fred liked me. march sitting by the bed, she called jo to her and began to bind up the hurt hands. where will you go?” “anywhere. it’s proper to use good words, and improve your vocabilary,” returned amy, with dignity. i won’t care for it, or let it change me a bit,” thought meg, and rustled across the room to shake hands with her friend. beth had a headache and lay on the sofa, trying to comfort herself with the cat and three kittens. feeling that she must get through the matter somehow, jo produced her manuscript and, blushing redder and redder with each sentence, blundered out fragments of the little speech carefully prepared for the occasion. she never finds herself very soon, so the minute her cap began to bob like a top-heavy dahlia, i whipped the _vicar of wakefield_ out of my pocket, and read away, with one eye on him and one on aunt. don’t laugh at the spinsters, dear girls, for often very tender, tragic romances are hidden away in the hearts that beat so quietly under the sober gowns, and many silent sacrifices of youth, health, ambition, love itself, make the faded faces beautiful in god’s sight. i think you will prosper, for the sincere wish to be good is half the battle. she does not scold at all, and always calls me miss margaret, which is quite proper, you know, and treats me with respect. ” “yes, and she’s jolly and we like her lots,” added kitty, who is an ‘enfant terrible’. we might as well be in a treadmill. ” the threat sounded awful, but did not alarm jo, for she knew the irascible old gentleman would never lift a finger against his grandson, whatever he might say to the contrary. it was the best thing he could have done, far more soothing than the most eloquent words, for jo felt the unspoken sympathy, and in the silence learned the sweet solace which affection administers to sorrow. you have had the bitter, now comes the sweet. he is always kind and jolly, and will put me to rights, i know,” said jo to herself, and off she went. the days kept getting longer and longer, the weather was unusually variable and so were tempers; an unsettled feeling possessed everyone, and satan found plenty of mischief for the idle hands to do. “yes, i have. ” “thank you. from that day she was a model of obedience, and the old lady complacently admired the success of her training. i owe jo for a part of my education, and she believes in people’s paying their honest debts, so i’ll get round her in that way. jo read till her eyes gave out and she was sick of books, got so fidgety that even good-natured laurie had a quarrel with her, and so reduced in spirits that she desperately wished she had gone with aunt march. the teaching would render her independent, and such leisure as she got might be made profitable by writing, while the new scenes and society would be both useful and agreeable. we don’t mean to say much about them yet, because we are such very new brooms, but we don’t intend to be idle. if it was cheap ugliness, i’d say nothing, but it costs as much as the other, and i don’t get any satisfaction out of it. ” began amy, gesticulating with unseemly energy, but she got no further, for jo quenched her by slamming down the window. the old lady couldn’t resist her longing to see her nephew, for she had met laurie as she took her airing, and hearing of mr. she gave him entire confidence, he gave her the help she needed, and both found consolation in the act. yes, we shall drink to the fatherland in those?” jo frowned upon that piece of extravagance, and asked why he didn’t buy a frail of dates, a cask of raisins, and a bag of almonds, and be done with it? whereat mr. “meg” on the first lid, smooth and fair. march and her husband smiled and nodded at each other with happy faces, for they saw that their youngest had done well, not only in worldly things, but the better wealth of love, confidence, and happiness. you may laugh, if you want to. so did everyone else, even ‘croaker’ as the girls called the old lady, and the unfortunate dinner ended gaily, with bread and butter, olives and fun. annie made her sing, and some one said she had a remarkably fine voice. we have got on very economical so fur. the girl had gone, and i thought he had also, it was so still, and i was busily gabbling over a verb, and rocking to and fro in a most absurd way, when a little crow made me look up, and there was mr. “never take advice! can’t keep still all day, and not being a pussycat, i don’t like to doze by the fire. she was just recovering from one of these attacks when she was prevailed upon to escort miss crocker to a lecture, and in return for her virtue was rewarded with a new idea. “well, he was a great man, and when he couldn’t have one sister he took the other, and was happy. sallie’s friend, annie moffat, took a fancy to me, and asked me to come and spend a week with her when sallie does. don’t croak any more, but come home jolly, there’s a dear. ” “we will. to see them dance was ‘quite a landscape’, to use a teddyism. if ever i do get my wish, you see what i’ll do for brooke. march left the room with speed, and casting herself upon the bed, jo cried and scolded tempestuously as she told the awful news to beth and amy. i expected to see her brought home in fragments, but she managed him perfectly, and was the life of the party. “courage and honesty. 1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project gutenberg™ license. ” mrs. jo must have fallen asleep (as i dare say my reader has during this little homily), for suddenly laurie’s ghost seemed to stand before her, a substantial, lifelike ghost, leaning over her with the very look he used to wear when he felt a good deal and didn’t like to show it. “how could you mistake me so? i merely meant you to be properly dignified and composed, and you made yourself a perfect stock and stone. i thought you hated to be tied to a woman’s apron string?” retorted jo, quoting certain rebellious words of his own. he had simply said, in answer to her surprised inquiries as to the change, “i can’t afford it, my dear. ‘scarlet fever, ma’am. ” when john came down at last, expecting to find a pensive or reproachful wife, he was agreeably surprised to find meg placidly trimming a bonnet, and to be greeted with the request to read something about the election, if he was not too tired. you’ll spoil it if you do, for the interest of the story is more in the minds than in the actions of the people, and it will be all a muddle if you don’t explain as you go on,” said meg, who firmly believed that this book was the most remarkable novel ever written. “it looks like a fairy world,” said meg, smiling to herself, as she stood behind the curtain, watching the dazzling sight. march, and hope he’s seen the last of his pewmonia. ” “exactly. i’ll comfort meg while you go and get laurie. give him my lovingest hug that ever was, and kiss yourself a dozen times for your. ” “go on, please,” said laurie, as jo became absorbed in her work, looking a trifle displeased. bhaer offered jo some, with a look that made her wonder if chocolate was not the nectar drunk by the gods. i’m pining to know. wouldn’t you like the flower table? the little girls undertook it, but they are discouraged. ” meg stopped there, remembering all of a sudden that she hadn’t made up her mind, that she had told ‘her john’ to go away, and that he might be overhearing her inconsistent remarks. “i wish you well, my dear, i heartily wish you well, but i think you’ll be sorry for it,” said aunt march to meg, adding to the bridegroom, as he led her to the carriage, “you’ve got a treasure, young man, see that you deserve it. march sighed, and jo looked up with an air of relief. ” “my jo, you may say anything to your mother, for it is my greatest happiness and pride to feel that my girls confide in me and know how much i love them. ” “now she’s beginning to marm it. beth won’t be sick long, and hannah knows just what to do, and mother said we were to mind her, so i suppose we must, but it doesn’t seem quite right to me. if i get your grandpa to apologize for the shaking, will you give up running away?” asked jo seriously. she ran to him and held him close, crying, with repentant tears, “oh, john, my dear, kind, hard-working boy. swarthy boys and dark-eyed madonnas, staring at you from one corner of the studio, suggested murillo; oily brown shadows of faces with a lurid streak in the wrong place, meant rembrandt; buxom ladies and dropiscal infants, rubens; and turner appeared in tempests of blue thunder, orange lightning, brown rain, and purple clouds, with a tomato-colored splash in the middle, which might be the sun or a bouy, a sailor’s shirt or a king’s robe, as the spectator pleased. “das ist gut!” “die engel-kinder!” cried the poor things as they ate and warmed their purple hands at the comfortable blaze. all quiet, curtains down at the lower windows, servants out of sight, and nothing human visible but a curly black head leaning on a thin hand at the upper window. bhaer?” “oh, that’s the trouble is it? i thought there was something in the dimple that didn’t quite suit you. ” “won’t you first?” “don’t know how. i agreed to do his washing and mending, but he forgets to give out his things and i forget to look them over, so he comes to a sad pass sometimes. ” so laurie played and jo listened, with her nose luxuriously buried in heliotrope and tea roses. “if you tell laurie, i’ll never forgive you! she mustn’t, must she, mother?” said meg, looking distressed. next week you can go with beth and hannah, and have a nice time. this amiable spirit was felt at once, and both aunts ‘my deared’ her affectionately, looking what they afterward said emphatically, “that child improves every day. “it was not easy, but i could not find the heart to take you from that so happy home until i could haf a prospect of one to gif you, after much time, perhaps, and hard work. ” with that, jo shouldered her broom and marched into the house, wondering what they would all say to her. i’ve heard that the people who love best are often blindest to such things. i never will again!” but he did, oh bless you, yes, hundreds of times, and so did meg, both declaring that it was the sweetest jelly they ever made, for family peace was preserved in that little family jar. 8. they won’t let me. “how is the little dear?” asked laurie, for beth was his especial pet, and he felt more anxious about her than he liked to show. if i wasn’t too old for such things, i’d rather like to play it over again,” said amy, who began to talk of renouncing childish things at the mature age of twelve. “don’t you love to ride?” asked grace of amy, as they stood resting after a race round the field with the others, led by ned. i like peeps better than the gulls. ” “i’ll try not to, but i’m always possessed to burst out with some particularly blunt speech or revolutionary sentiment before her. ” laurie lifted his eyebrows and followed at a leisurely pace as she ran downstairs, but when they got into the carriage he took the reins himself, and left little baptiste nothing to do but fold his arms and fall asleep on his perch. this is the sort of shelf on which young wives and mothers may consent to be laid, safe from the restless fret and fever of the world, finding loyal lovers in the little sons and daughters who cling to them, undaunted by sorrow, poverty, or age, walking side by side, through fair and stormy weather, with a faithful friend, who is, in the true sense of the good old saxon word, the ‘house-band’, and learning, as meg learned, that a woman’s happiest kingdom is home, her highest honor the art of ruling it not as a queen, but as a wise wife and mother. ” “did he?” and jo opened her eyes as if it had never occurred to her before. as the laugh subsided, mrs. “use the chicken then, the toughness won’t matter in a salad,” advised his wife. the equipages are as varied as the company and attract as much attention, especially the low basket barouches in which ladies drive themselves, with a pair of dashing ponies, gay nets to keep their voluminous flounces from overflowing the diminutive vehicles, and little grooms on the perch behind. martin, stopping as you ride gallantly through the world to share your cloak with the beggar. “thank you, i prefer spiders,” she replied, fishing up two unwary little ones who had gone to a creamy death. it’s no exertion to me, but you don’t look equal to it. lessons in patience were so sweetly taught her that she could not fail to learn them, charity for all, the lovely spirit that can forgive and truly forget unkindness, the loyalty to duty that makes the hardest easy, and the sincere faith that fears nothing, but trusts undoubtingly. “i hate to borrow as much as mother does, and i knew aunt march would croak, she always does, if you ask for a ninepence. ” “if i shouldn’t be in the way, it would be very pleasant. “i’ll try not to be vain,” said amy. john always said what was his was hers, but would he think it right to spend not only the prospective five-and-twenty, but another five-and-twenty out of the household fund? that was the question. “no, it wouldn’t,” returned jo, “i neither like, respect, nor admire tudor, though his grandfather’s uncle’s nephew’s niece was a third cousin to a lord. squirrels were busy with their small harvesting. in a big, dashing hand, laurie wrote. “how do you do? are you sick?” laurie opened the window, and croaked out as hoarsely as a raven. ” “did the spider accept the old fellow’s invitation?” asked laurie, yawning. a letter from washington added to their trouble, for mr. jo skipped up, and sitting on the top step, affected to be searching for her book, but was really wondering how best to introduce the dangerous object of her visit. but, after a while, they found that he considered them the benefactors, and could not do enough to show how grateful he was for mrs. “the good lady next door says he is studying too hard and needs young society, amusement, and exercise. i’m apt to forget my resolutions, but if i had something always about me to remind me, i guess i should do better. “don’t laugh! act as if it was all right!” and, ordering roderigo up, banished him from the kingdom with wrath and scorn. i don’t believe you’ve got any heart. it doesn’t matter where i go or what i do. “but, sir, i thought every story should have some sort of a moral, so i took care to have a few of my sinners repent. “there are two which i want to have come out, but i must wait a week. beth helped her dress, and made a charming little wreath for her hair, while jo astonished her family by getting herself up with unusual care, and hinting darkly that the tables were about to be turned. one from her mother made her cheeks glow and her eyes fill, for it said to her. in this way, the sly old gentleman got round proud jo, and furnished her with the style of boy in which she most delighted. she was a long time about it, and when she returned, he was stretched out with both arms under his head, sound asleep, while aunt march had pulled down the curtains and sat doing nothing in an unusual fit of benignity. i didn’t like to ask, as everyone knew it or pretended they did. instead of which, that undignified creature answered, with an irrepressible sob, “because you are going away. “jo, dear, i want to say one thing, and then we’ll put it by forever. ” “you can’t ask mother for new ones, they are so expensive, and you are so careless. “i think i haven’t done much harm yet, and may keep this to pay for my time,” she said, after a long meditation, adding impatiently, “i almost wish i hadn’t any conscience, it’s so inconvenient. ” if she had even said ‘i hate you’ in a petulant or coquettish tone, he would have laughed and rather liked it, but the grave, almost sad, accent in her voice made him open his eyes, and ask quickly. grandpa has set his heart upon it, your people like it, and i can’t get on without you. ” “that was understood, and i trusted you. “that’s so like my beth!” said jo, waving her hat, with a grateful face. “i’m perfectly miserable, but if you consider me presentable, i die happy. “is it fairies?” asked amy. tell beth frank asked for her, and was sorry to hear of her ill health. ” and away went meg to help ‘that man’ in his highly improper employment. “i advise you to sail away in one of your ships, and never come home again till you have tried your own way,” said jo, whose imagination was fired by the thought of such a daring exploit, and whose sympathy was excited by what she called ‘teddy’s wrongs’. earthly joys and hopes and sorrows break like ripples on the strand of the deep and solemn river where her willing feet now stand. bernard and the dent du midi on the other, pretty vevay in the valley, and lausanne upon the hill beyond, a cloudless blue sky overhead, and the bluer lake below, dotted with the picturesque boats that look like white-winged gulls. it came quite close to beth, and looked at her with a friendly eye and sat upon a warm stone, dressing its wet feathers, quite at home. it’s a dreadfully unjust world,” said meg bitterly. “i wish to get a little dress for my tina, and i am too stupid to go alone. in fact, he rather prided himself on his narrow escapes, and liked to thrill the girls with graphic accounts of his triumphs over wrathful tutors, dignified professors, and vanquished enemies. ” “i can’t, dear, because you aren’t invited,” began meg, but jo broke in impatiently, “now, meg, be quiet or you will spoil it all. then she remembered her mother’s promise and, slipping her hand under her pillow, drew out a little crimson-covered book. jo valued goodness highly, but she also possessed a most feminine respect for intellect, and a little discovery which she made about the professor added much to her regard for him. fervently hoping that he would get out before she did, amy utterly ignored the basket at her feet, and congratulating herself that she had on her new traveling dress, returned the young man’s greeting with her usual suavity and spirit. i was thanking my stars that i’d learned to make nice buttonholes, when the parlor door opened and shut, and someone began to hum, kennst du das land, like a big bumblebee. ” “goodbye, dear,” and with these words, uttered in the tone she liked, laurie left her, after a handshake almost painful in its heartiness. miss kate and mr. “we needed that lesson, and we won’t forget it. “i haven’t got any other. it must have possessed some magic, for the submissive spirit of its gentle owner seemed to enter into jo, and when laurie came running down with a glass of wine, she took it with a smile, and said bravely, “i drink— health to my beth! you are a good doctor, teddy, and such a comfortable friend. she was sitting here that day, leaning her head on her hand, with a homesick heart and heavy eyes, thinking of beth and wondering why laurie did not come. may i speak quite freely, and will you remember that it’s mother who blames as well as mother who sympathizes?” “indeed i will! speak to me as if i were little meg again. i’m getting too old for such things,” observed meg, who was as much a child as ever about ‘dressing-up’ frolics. “i’m sure i am,” echoed amy, poring over the engraved copy of the madonna and child, which her mother had given her in a pretty frame. “you’re the crossest person in it!” returned amy, washing out the sum that was all wrong with the tears that had fallen on her slate. laurie’s eyes followed her with pleasure, for she neither romped nor sauntered, but danced with spirit and grace, making the delightsome pastime what it should be. i’m disappointed, but the girl can’t help it, and the only thing left for you to do is to go away for a time. don’t you remember how we used to do on our birthdays?” answered jo. ” and mr. it was getting late, and i was afraid if it wasn’t done right away that i shouldn’t have it done at all, and you know when i start to do a thing, i hate to give it up. then jo grew frightened, meg begged to be allowed to write the truth, and even hannah said she ‘would think of it, though there was no danger yet’. it’s a pity, but nothing goes right this week, and pip has had the worst of the experiment. “good-by, my darlings! god bless and keep us all!” whispered mrs. ” if he proposed a little amusement at home, “no, it would disturb the babies. one of these was the ‘p. remembering the painted boots, she surveyed her white satin slippers with girlish satisfaction, and chasseed down the room, admiring her aristocratic feet all by herself. the potatoes had to be hurried, not to keep the asparagus waiting, and were not done at the last. she got through her lessons as well as she could, and managed to escape reprimands by being a model of deportment. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™ concept and trademark. meg meanwhile had apparently forgotten the matter and was absorbed in preparations for her father’s return, but all of a sudden a change seemed to come over her, and, for a day or two, she was quite unlike herself. want of exercise robs them of cheerfulness, and too much devotion to that idol of american women, the teapot, makes them feel as if they were all nerve and no muscle. ” “not a boy!” “i like to please laurie, and i’m not afraid of mr. “aunt march had a good fit and sent the supper,” cried jo, with a sudden inspiration. his very clothes seemed to partake of the hospitable nature of the wearer. we ‘did’ london to our heart’s content, thanks to fred and frank, and were sorry to go away, for though english people are slow to take you in, when they once make up their minds to do it they cannot be outdone in hospitality, i think. then the all conquering tudor had danced four times with amy at a late party and only once with may—that was thorn number two. “i don’t approve of the match, but i’ve made up my mind to bear it, and shall not say a word against it,” said jo solemnly. it was silly, i dare say, but it changed his mind, for i got rather excited, and told the story in my topsy-turvy way, and his wife heard, and said so kindly, ‘take it, thomas, and oblige the young lady. one day in october, when they were ripe, he picked one and took it to market. a startled or surprised look from one of you when i spoke sharply rebuked me more than any words could have done, and the love, respect, and confidence of my children was the sweetest reward i could receive for my efforts to be the woman i would have them copy. “a trifle, perhaps, she’s such a captivating little woman i can’t help being proud of her. mercifully unconscious of what she had done, jo sat with her nose in the air, and a revolutionary aspect which was anything but inviting. ” “ah, but i didn’t mean to go alone!” and laurie walked fast through the room with an expression which it was well his grandfather did not see. seeing that he really was out of temper, jo, who knew how to manage him, assumed a contrite expression, and going artistically down upon her knees, said meekly, “please forgive me for being so cross. isn’t that music gay?” down they went, feeling a trifle timid, for they seldom went to parties, and informal as this little gathering was, it was an event to them. ” laurie bit his lips, and turning a little from the pensive speaker, read the following document, with praiseworthy gravity, considering the spelling: my last will and testiment i, amy curtis march, being in my sane mind, go give and bequeethe all my earthly property—viz. she’s my girl, and a regular good one she is, too. davis gave a portentous “hem!” and said, in his most impressive manner. “upon my word, i didn’t move it. with a blissful sense of burdens lifted off, meg and jo closed their weary eyes, and lay at rest, like storm-beaten boats safe at anchor in a quiet harbor. “if meg had four, the house wouldn’t hold them, and master and missis would have to camp in the garden,” broke in jo, who, enveloped in a big blue pinafore, was giving the last polish to the door handles. the sleeves of my blue dress were all worn out, and meg put in new ones, but the full front came wrong and they are more blue than the dress. i often think i ought to go home, but they all say ‘stay’. don’t laugh, but your nose is such a comfort to me,” and amy softly caressed the well-cut feature with artistic satisfaction. how came you to be awake?” “i can’t sleep, i’m so anxious,” said meg. remember it, and try with heart and soul to master this quick temper, before it brings you greater sorrow and regret than you have known today. ” “little goose girl, who kept a hundred fat geese in the field,” said amy, when sallie’s invention gave out. i’m not playing, i never do,” said frank, dismayed at the sentimental predicament out of which he was to rescue the absurd couple. ” “i’m sure our pops look like silk, and they are nice enough for us. mrs. i’m too happy to care what anyone says or thinks, and i’m going to have my little wedding just as i like it. march the next day, neglecting everything to look at, wait upon, and listen to the new invalid, who was in a fair way to be killed by kindness. there were to be no ceremonious performances, everything was to be as natural and homelike as possible, so when aunt march arrived, she was scandalized to see the bride come running to welcome and lead her in, to find the bridegroom fastening up a garland that had fallen down, and to catch a glimpse of the paternal minister marching upstairs with a grave countenance and a wine bottle under each arm. meg wanted me to bring some of her blanc mange, she makes it very nicely, and beth thought her cats would be comforting. of course it rained when we got to london, and there was nothing to be seen but fog and umbrellas. if you say you love him, i know i shall do something desperate;” and he looked as if he would keep his word, as he clenched his hands with a wrathful spark in his eyes. “i’ve no heart to write, and if i had, nobody cares for my things. “now, then, mum?” i gave my order as soberly as i could, and slamming down the door, with an “aye, aye, mum,” the man made his horse walk, as if going to a funeral. beth mourned as for a departed kitten, and meg refused to defend her pet. beth and my boy report daily. oh, i must tell you that i came near having a quarrel with laurie. jo nodded and laughed, and flourished her broom as she called out. i’ve got them all, thank god, and am the happiest woman in the world,” and meg laid her hand on her tall boy’s head, with a face full of tender and devout content. ” amy spoke and looked so like a homesick child whose heart was full that laurie forgot his bashfulness all at once, and gave her just what she wanted—the petting she was used to and the cheerful conversation she needed. she was sick all the next day, and on saturday went home, quite used up with her fortnight’s fun and feeling that she had ‘sat in the lap of luxury’ long enough. ” “good,” thought the old gentleman. i know that i can carry it out perfectly well, if you and the girls will help a little, and i don’t see why i can’t if i’m willing to pay for it,” said amy, with the decision which opposition was apt to change into obstinacy. he is handsome, young, clever enough, and very rich—ever so much richer than the laurences. if all brothers were treated as well as laurie was at this period, they would be a much happier race of beings than they are. kirke till june. d. amy found grace a well-mannered, merry, little person, and after staring dumbly at one another for a few minutes, they suddenly became very good friends. he talks of her constantly, writes poetry, and moons about in a most suspicious manner. may i venture to suggest in ‘a honeymoon paradise’ that five o’clock is the dinner hour at your hotel?” laurie rose as he spoke, returned the pictures with a smile and a bow and looked at his watch, as if to remind her that even moral lectures should have an end. chapter eleven experiments “the first of june! the kings are off to the seashore tomorrow, and i’m free. she felt excited and strange, and not knowing what else to do, followed a capricious impulse, and, withdrawing her hands, said petulantly, “i don’t choose. “my poor dear, how dreadful for you! i ought to have gone,” said jo, taking her sister in her arms as she sat down in her mother’s big chair, with a remorseful face. “we’re an ambitious set, aren’t we? every one of us, but beth, wants to be rich and famous, and gorgeous in every respect. “oh, what is it?” exclaimed jo, trembling. s. ” and john sipped his tea with an air of reposeful rapture, which was of very short duration however, for as he put down his cup, the door handle rattled mysteriously, and a little voice was heard, saying impatiently. ” the unusual spectacle of her busy mother rocking comfortably and reading early in the morning made jo feel as if some unnatural phenomenon had occurred, for an eclipse, an earthquake, or a volcanic eruption would hardly have seemed stranger. i couldn’t wait. news from their father comforted the girls very much, for though dangerously ill, the presence of the best and tenderest of nurses had already done him good. ” “don’t let us do any lessons, beth, for a while, but play all the time and rest, as the girls mean to,” proposed amy. ” “hum!” said jo, still intent upon her sister’s face, for the bright color faded as quickly as it came, the smile vanished, and presently a tear lay shining on the window ledge. tell me all about it, and don’t give me wine again, it makes me act so. brooke’s real feelings. “it will decide my career, for if i have any genius, i shall find it out in rome, and will do something to prove it. to have a happy youth, to be well and wisely married, and to lead useful, pleasant lives, with as little care and sorrow to try them as god sees fit to send. “what worries you dear? has anything dreadful happened?” asked the anxious john, tenderly kissing the crown of the little cap, which was all askew. “what do you call this stuff?” he asked, touching a fold of her dress that had blown over his knee. if it fails, they generously give her the whole. “i prefer the lovering part. “well,” said jo, laughing, “if my people are ‘philosophical and metaphysical’, it isn’t my fault, for i know nothing about such things, except what i hear father say, sometimes. ” with the delightful enthusiasm of youth, they took the solitary boy into their midst and made much of him, and he found something very charming in the innocent companionship of these simple-hearted girls. i hope i shall see her again, but she seems so far away. we can’t tell him so, but he won’t do it again, take my word for it. but he’s set, and i’ve got to do just as he did, unless i break away and please myself, as my father did. “let him be a musician if he wants to, and not plague his life out sending him to college, when he hates to go. they were early, and while miss crocker set the heel of her stocking, jo amused herself by examining the faces of the people who occupied the seat with them. “time for lunch,” said mr. “you thoughtful creeter, you’re determined we shan’t miss that dear lamb ef you can help it. so i got grandpa to say it was high time we did something, and off i pelted to the office yesterday, for the doctor looked sober, and hannah most took my head off when i proposed a telegram. e below. “how beautifully you do it! i wish i could draw,” said meg, with mingled admiration and regret in her voice. but he did not write the letter that day, for as he rummaged out his best paper, he came across something which changed his purpose. all members to appear in uniform and shoulder their brooms at nine precisely. “christopher columbus! what’s the matter?” cried jo, as beth put out her hand as if to warn her off, and asked quickly. if she had seen the brown eyes then, she would have stopped short, but she never looked up, and the lesson was not spoiled for her. ” “that ever i should live to see you a henpecked husband and enjoying it!” cried jo, with uplifted hands. they’ll think it’s splendid,” said amy, much impressed by the note. having no ornaments fine enough for this important occasion, amy looped her fleecy skirts with rosy clusters of azalea, and framed the white shoulders in delicate green vines. “there! she promised i should go next time, for this is the last ice we shall have. if i’ve got some of his wise ideas jumbled up with my romance, so much the better for me. he felt as if suddenly shaken out of a pensive dream and found it impossible to go to sleep again. “i wish you’d do me the favor to rouse yourself a little,” she said sharply. if you’d remember that, and practice it, you’d be better liked than i am, because there is more of you. ” they found mr. mr. bhaer got hold of them?” jo turned hot at the bare idea, and stuffed the whole bundle into her stove, nearly setting the chimney afire with the blaze. “oh, laurie, laurie, i knew you’d come to me!” i think everything was said and settled then, for as they stood together quite silent for a moment, with the dark head bent down protectingly over the light one, amy felt that no one could comfort and sustain her so well as laurie, and laurie decided that amy was the only woman in the world who could fill jo’s place and make him happy. davis particularly detested the odor of the fashionable pickle, and disgust added to his wrath. so the toast was drunk, the pledge made and loyally kept in spite of many temptations, for with instinctive wisdom, the girls seized a happy moment to do their friend a service, for which he thanked them all his life. go out more, keep cheerful as well as busy, for you are the sunshine-maker of the family, and if you get dismal there is no fair weather. it was a comfortable room, though the carpet was faded and the furniture very plain, for a good picture or two hung on the walls, books filled the recesses, chrysanthemums and christmas roses bloomed in the windows, and a pleasant atmosphere of home peace pervaded it. she felt proud to know that he was an honored professor in berlin, though only a poor language-master in america, and his homely, hard-working life was much beautified by the spice of romance which this discovery gave it. “we read a story of yours the other day, and enjoyed it very much,” observed the elder miss lamb, wishing to compliment the literary lady, who did not look the character just then, it must be confessed. saturday afternoons are riotous times, whether spent in the house or out, for on pleasant days they all go to walk, like a seminary, with the professor and myself to keep order, and then such fun! we are very good friends now, and i’ve begun to take lessons. i’ve tried, but i can’t change the feeling, and it would be a lie to say i do when i don’t. for with eyes made clear by many tears, and a heart softened by the tenderest sorrow, she recognized the beauty of her sister’s life—uneventful, unambitious, yet full of the genuine virtues which ‘smell sweet, and blossom in the dust’, the self-forgetfulness that makes the humblest on earth remembered soonest in heaven, the true success which is possible to all. kiss them, uncle teddy,” said wicked jo. “we were only talking. our burdens are here, our road is before us, and the longing for goodness and happiness is the guide that leads us through many troubles and mistakes to the peace which is a true celestial city. i think i shall write books, and get rich and famous, that would suit me, so that is my favorite dream. ” “won’t she?” asked laurie anxiously. “oh, mr. there are a lot of things you can do with project gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™ electronic works. “i’m glad you came, i was afraid you wouldn’t. he was perfectly open and honorable about meg, for he told us he loved her, but would earn a comfortable home before he asked her to marry him. i arranged them myself, remembering that you didn’t like what hannah calls a ‘sot-bookay’,” said laurie, handing her a delicate nosegay, in a holder that she had long coveted as she daily passed it in cardiglia’s window. i nearly spoiled her by indulgence. “i’ll show you how, for i’ve studied you while we were frolicking, and i’m not at all satisfied with you. ” “may i know the others?” jo looked up and jo looked down, then said slowly, with sudden color in her cheeks. may’s answer was inaudible, but another young lady, whose temper was evidently a little soured by making lemonade, added, with a disagreeable laugh, “very lovely, for she knew she wouldn’t sell them at her own table. i’m disappointed in you, and haven’t spirits to see your father now. her father stood leaning his head on the mantelpiece and did not turn as she came in, but her mother stretched out her arms as if for help, and jo went to comfort her without a word. meg had a quiet rapture, and then brooded over the letter, while jo set the sickroom in order, and hannah “knocked up a couple of pies in case of company unexpected”. she has fine books and pictures, knows interesting persons, and seems friendly, so i shall make myself agreeable, for i do want to get into good society, only it isn’t the same sort that amy likes. you should do just what your grandfather wishes, my dear boy,” said meg in her most maternal tone. she was so glad and surprised she took it right into her arms, and thanked him over and over. ” (hannah’s pronunciation of char-a-banc. go, pick up my things, like a cherub, as you are,” said jo, dropping down under a maple tree, which was carpeting the bank with crimson leaves. the children are regular archangels, and i—well, i’m jo, and never shall be anything else. ’ said the old woman. mother, if she should die, it would be my fault. to this will and testiment i set my hand and seal on this 20th day of nov. meg didn’t like to be pitied and made to feel poor. during the bustle jo had scarcely spoken but flown about, looking pale and wild, with her things half off, her dress torn, and her hands cut and bruised by ice and rails and refractory buckles. the ‘effalunt’ sat up, looking as much in earnest as any of them, and said soberly to me, “i gif you my wort it is so, if we make too large a noise you shall say hush! to us, and we go more softly. march was mending again. i’ll listen,” said jo, with a desperate sort of patience. gummidge did her sweetheart, throw cold water over him, and get so thorny no one dares touch or look at you. time and absence had done its work on both the young people. in vain meg begged him to stop. meg could walk in the conservatory whenever she liked and revel in bouquets, jo browsed over the new library voraciously, and convulsed the old gentleman with her criticisms, amy copied pictures and enjoyed beauty to her heart’s content, and laurie played ‘lord of the manor’ in the most delightful style. “young ladies, attention, if you please!” at the stern order the buzz ceased, and fifty pairs of blue, black, gray, and brown eyes were obediently fixed upon his awful countenance. section 2. march with a sigh and a smile, as she smoothed and fastened up jo’s disheveled hair. laurence began to laugh, and she knew the day was won. for motherly eyes are quick to see any change in children’s faces. ” “don’t think of me at all. ” “on my word, mother, i haven’t! i never saw that note before, and don’t know anything about it, as true as i live!” said jo, so earnestly that they believed her. kirke’s. “if marmee shook her fist instead of kissing her hand to us, it would serve us right, for more ungrateful wretches than we are were never seen,” cried jo, taking a remorseful satisfaction in the snowy walk and bitter wind. laurie lay on the rug, pretending to rest, but staring into the fire with the thoughtful look which made his black eyes beautifully soft and clear. , that evening, she laughed, and said, “that must have been professor bhaer, he’s always doing things of that sort. ” her amazed look and quick answer caused laurie to repair his error as fast as possible. ” “that will do, jo. “about your age,” nan said. girls are quick to read such signs and feel their eloquence. i never saw anyone faint, and i don’t choose to make myself all black and blue, tumbling flat as you do. of course they were the most remarkable children ever born, as will be shown when i mention that they walked at eight months, talked fluently at twelve months, and at two years they took their places at table, and behaved with a propriety which charmed all beholders. laurie’s bashfulness soon wore off, for jo’s gentlemanly demeanor amused and set him at his ease, and jo was her merry self again, because her dress was forgotten and nobody lifted their eyebrows at her. jo groaned and leaned both elbows on the table in a despondent attitude, but amy spatted away energetically, and beth, who sat at the other window, said, smiling, “two pleasant things are going to happen right away. demi lay fast asleep, not in his usual spreadeagle attitude, but in a subdued bunch, cuddled close in the circle of his father’s arm and holding his father’s finger, as if he felt that justice was tempered with mercy, and had gone to sleep a sadder and wiser baby. a low hedge parted the two estates. march declared she felt ten years younger. it will do me good, for since you came i have been altogether lazy and luxurious. hale blank hospital, washington. ” “no, no. laurie was in a flutter of excitement at the idea of having company, and flew about to get ready, for as mrs. ‘ha! ha!’ laughed the ghost, and having peeped through the keyhole at the princesses spinning away for dear life, the evil spirit picked up her victim and put him in a large tin box, where there were eleven other knights packed together without their heads, like sardines, who all rose and began to. they had a long talk that night, and meg learned to love her husband better for his poverty, because it seemed to have made a man of him, given him the strength and courage to fight his own way, and taught him a tender patience with which to bear and comfort the natural longings and failures of those he loved. ” “i’ll try,” said jo, winking hard as she knelt down to pick up the basket she had joyfully upset. a key is thrown in, which unlocks the door, and in a spasm of rapture he tears off his chains and rushes away to find and rescue his lady love. ” “ah, heaven, she gifs me the name that no one speaks since minna died!” cried the professor, pausing in a puddle to regard her with grateful delight. “well, sir, what is it?” and laurie sat down, without a sign of interest in face or voice. “oh, my girls, however long you may live, i never can wish you a greater happiness than this!” *** end of the project gutenberg ebook little women *** updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed. when no one could eat any more, the professor proposed the first regular toast, which was always drunk at such times—“aunt march, god bless her!” a toast heartily given by the good man, who never forgot how much he owed her, and quietly drunk by the boys, who had been taught to keep her memory green. ” “just wait till i see annie moffat, and i’ll show you how to settle such ridiculous stuff. john brooke’, whereat she groaned tragically and cast it into the fire, feeling that laurie’s prank had hastened the evil day for her. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment. mr. “not quite. have you spoken to her?’ “yes, she owned she had a trouble, and promised to tell me by-and-by. i fancy he has a hard life of it. january a happy new year to you all, my dearest family, which of course includes mr. “i’ve got so much to learn before i shall be ready, it seems a short time to me,” answered meg, with a sweet gravity in her face never seen there before. during the next few minutes the rumor that amy march had got twenty-four delicious limes (she ate one on the way) and was going to treat circulated through her ‘set’, and the attentions of her friends became quite overwhelming. “now, i call that lovely of her, don’t you?” cried one girl. ” “now my turn,” said fred, as his hand came last. i wish jo would tell me all about it. laurence, faithful hannah, and devoted laurie. laurence was not allowed to see her, so hannah had everything her own way, and busy dr. but that autumn the serpent got into meg’s paradise, and tempted her like many a modern eve, not with apples, but with dress. her sisters used to say that they rather liked to get jo into a fury because she was such an angel afterward. “bless me, what’s all this?” cried the old lady with a rap of her cane as she glanced from the pale young gentleman to the scarlet young lady. jo lay motionless, and her sister fancied that she was asleep, till a stifled sob made her exclaim, as she touched a wet cheek. “i shouldn’t have come over if i could have helped it, but i can’t get on without my little woman any more than a. so she enjoyed herself heartily, and found, what isn’t always the case, that her granted wish was all she had hoped. the girls never forgot that night, for no sleep came to them as they kept their watch, with that dreadful sense of powerlessness which comes to us in hours like those. march got her wet things off, her warm slippers on, and sitting down in the easy chair, drew amy to her lap, preparing to enjoy the happiest hour of her busy day. laurence a pair of slippers. with her eyes on her work jo answered soberly, “i want something new. miss kate took out her sketch again, and margaret watched her, while mr. march said, with a mixture of satisfaction and regret, “she does not love john yet, but will soon learn to. i told mamma so yesterday, and she looked as glad and grateful as if i’d given her a check for a million, to be spent in charity. meg, my dear, i value the womanly skill which keeps home happy more than white hands or fashionable accomplishments. winkle rose to say with great elegance, “we don’t wish any boys, they only joke and bounce about. brooke tenderly. snow produces a glow and a tingle, if applied rightly. i’ll not be sentimental or dissatisfied, mother. “i knew brooke would have it all his own way, he always does, for when he makes up his mind to accomplish anything, it’s done though the sky falls,” said laurie, when he had presented his offering and his congratulations. it was gone before she could study it and the listless expression back again. there is a pile of clouds in the east, it’s not fair, and i don’t go. ” “jo does use such slang words!” observed amy, with a reproving look at the long figure stretched on the rug. out-and-out beggars get taken care of, but poor gentle folks fare badly, because they won’t ask, and people don’t dare to offer charity. jo put her arm round her and, leaning cheek to cheek, read also, with the quiet expression so seldom seen on her restless face. “there’s gratitude for you! and speaking of gratitude reminds me to mention that you may thank hannah for saving your wedding cake from destruction. don’t you think you are?” jo was determined to have it out now, and tried to look quite placid, though she quaked a little after her bold speech. brooke and ned the other, while fred vaughn, the riotous twin, did his best to upset both by paddling about in a wherry like a disturbed water bug. they like john though he is poor. “well, i will, if mother doesn’t mind. i’ll be sure and wear the nice flannels you sent, marmee, and read carefully the books father has marked. that is why he is so charming and we all like him so much. i’d rather have a hearty english handshake than all the sentimental salutations in france. we had a charming time poking about the ruins, the vaults where the monster tun is, and the beautiful gardens made by the elector long ago for his english wife. “that will do him good, and he’ll come home in such a tender, penitent state of mind, that i shan’t dare to see him,” she said, adding, as she went slowly home, feeling as if she had murdered some innocent thing, and buried it under the leaves. she went once with jo, but the old gentleman, not being aware of her infirmity, stared at her so hard from under his heavy eyebrows, and said “hey!” so loud, that he frightened her so much her ‘feet chattered on the floor’, she never told her mother, and she ran away, declaring she would never go there any more, not even for the dear piano. she did her best, she asked advice of mrs. “i don’t complain near as much as the others do, and i shall be more careful than ever now, for i’ve had warning from susie’s downfall,” said amy morally. it was asleep till the fairy prince came through the wood, and waked it up. no one ever regretted the admittance of sam weller, for a more devoted, well-behaved, and jovial member no club could have. i thought you were asleep, so i just made a little private moan for my one beauty. mercy on us, how they did talk! first one, then the other, then all burst out together—trying to tell the history of three years in half an hour. brooke looked up and said quickly, “young ladies in america love independence as much as their ancestors did, and are admired and respected for supporting themselves. pray forward amy’s as soon as you can spare them. the stage was dark and the glow of the furnace had a fine effect, especially as real steam issued from the kettle when the witch took off the cover. ” “army shoes, best to be had,” cried jo. ’ ‘i obey, and return victorious or dead!’ with these thrilling words he rushed away, and flinging open the door of the mauve salon, was about to enter, when he received. i’d just got to where they all tumbled into the water when i forgot and laughed out loud. we can’t meddle safely in such matters, and had better not get ‘romantic rubbish’ as you call it, into our heads, lest it spoil our friendship. can’t you do the same with your governess?” “i have none. “where is john?” asked meg anxiously. “here i am, bag and baggage,” she said briskly. act fourth displayed the despairing roderigo on the point of stabbing himself because he has been told that zara has deserted him. neither could he offer jo his hand, except figuratively, for both were full. ” “it’s always so. i enjoyed the trips to hampton court and the kensington museum more than anything else, for at hampton i saw raphael’s cartoons, and at the museum, rooms full of pictures by turner, lawrence, reynolds, hogarth, and the other great creatures. whatever shall i do? the burn shows badly, and i can’t take any out. “isn’t that right? i thought it was better to do it so, because meg’s initials are m. you’ve grown bigger and bonnier, but you are the same scapegrace as ever. in the kitchen reigned confusion and despair. somehow the kind act finished her despondency, and when all the rest went to show themselves to mrs. the history of a squash once upon a time a farmer planted a little seed in his garden, and after a while it sprouted and became a vine and bore many squashes. “we are not strangers, we are neighbors, and you needn’t think you’d be a bother. “oh, yes! it was very sweet, and i’m much obliged to whoever translated it for me. email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website and official page at www. the sight seemed to touch him very much, for suddenly stooping down, he asked in a tone that meant a great deal, “heart’s dearest, why do you cry?” now, if jo had not been new to this sort of thing she would have said she wasn’t crying, had a cold in her head, or told any other feminine fib proper to the occasion. they kissed their mother quietly, clung about her tenderly, and tried to wave their hands cheerfully when she drove away. meg and i would make you laugh over our funny stage properties, and we’d have jolly times. ” “what do you like?” “to live in italy, and to enjoy myself in my own way. i’ve always longed for lots of boys, and never had enough, now i can fill the house full and revel in the little dears to my heart’s content. this website includes information about project gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. amy had a bower in hers, rather small and earwiggy, but very pretty to look at, with honeysuckle and morning-glories hanging their colored horns and bells in graceful wreaths all over it, tall white lilies, delicate ferns, and as many brilliant, picturesque plants as would consent to blossom there. we thought hannah was overdoing the authority business, and your mother ought to know. ” “stir away, it won’t hurt me and it may amuse you, as the big man said when his little wife beat him. “in spite of the curly crop, i don’t see the ‘son jo’ whom i left a year ago,” said mr. a russian prince condescended to sit in a corner for an hour and talk with a massive lady, dressed like hamlet’s mother in black velvet with a pearl bridle under her chin. “stopped to get the license for tomorrow, ma’am. at seven o’clock, the four members ascended to the clubroom, tied their badges round their heads, and took their seats with great solemnity. don’t you see?” “your hands are bigger than mine, and you will stretch my glove dreadfully,” began meg, whose gloves were a tender point with her. “oh, have you e’er heard of kate kearney? she lives on the banks of killarney; from the glance of her eye, shun danger and fly, for fatal’s the glance of kate kearney. “girls,” said meg seriously, looking from the tumbled head beside her to the two little night-capped ones in the room beyond, “mother wants us to read and love and mind these books, and we must begin at once. ” “here comes ned moffat. settle your wig, jo, and tell me if i shall telegraph to your mother, or do anything?” asked laurie, who never had been reconciled to the loss of his friend’s one beauty. i am not quite satisfied, but i can’t blame you, for i know how willingly you sacrificed your vanity, as you call it, to your love. laurie graduates then, and you’d enjoy commencement as something new. she would very gladly have gone out to enjoy the bright wintry weather, but discovering that laurie was dropping with sleep in spite of manful efforts to conceal the fact, she persuaded him to rest on the sofa, while she wrote a note to her mother. but meg looked straight up in her husband’s eyes, and said, “i will!” with such tender trust in her own face and voice that her mother’s heart rejoiced and aunt march sniffed audibly. “i can’t have a carriage without its costing ever so much. all three laughed as meg spoke, for that linen closet was a joke. “oh, certainly, if they are in your way,” and sweeping her contributions into her apron, pell-mell, she walked off, feeling that herself and her works of art had been insulted past forgiveness. scott was a lively, pretty girl, with nothing to do but be agreeable, and she performed her mission most successfully. tell it to mother and keep out of trouble, as i should have done,” said meg warningly. she stood a minute looking at the party vanishing above, and as demi’s short plaid legs toiled up the last stair, a sudden sense of loneliness came over her so strongly that she looked about her with dim eyes, as if to find something to lean upon, for even teddy had deserted her. 1. after that we got on better, and now i read my lessons pretty well, for this way of studying suits me, and i can see that the grammar gets tucked into the tales and poetry as one gives pills in jelly. so poor meg sang and rocked, told stories and tried every sleep-prevoking wile she could devise, but all in vain, the big eyes wouldn’t shut, and long after daisy had gone to byelow, like the chubby little bunch of good nature she was, naughty demi lay staring at the light, with the most discouragingly wide-awake expression of countenance. “i feel to know the strong-minded lady who goes so bravely under many horse noses, and so fast through much mud. i don’t let the girls hev coffee only once a week, accordin to your wish, and keep em on plain wholesome vittles. for beth, i indulge no hopes except that she may be well. he longed to lay amy’s head down on his shoulder, and tell her to have a good cry, but he did not dare, so took her hand instead, and gave it a sympathetic squeeze that was better than words. the story was not a long one, and when it was finished, he ventured to ask a few questions as a reward of merit. ” margaret sat thinking a moment, while jo stood with her hands behind her, looking both interested and a little perplexed, for it was a new thing to see meg blushing and talking about admiration, lovers, and things of that sort. i think so, myself, and mean to do it in marble, so that, whatever happens, i may at least keep the image of my little angel. amy never lectured now. “a pair of boot lacings,” returned jo, guessing and defeating his purpose. sitting at the window, beth’s work often dropped into her lap, and she leaned her head upon her hand, in a dejected attitude, while her eyes rested on the dull, autumnal landscape. how odd! teddy never seals mine,” said jo next day, as she distributed the contents of the little post office. can’t promise to take it. i felt i ought to do it, for life is uncertain and i don’t want any ill feeling over my tomb. ” “is that all?” asked jo, as mrs. ” laurie walked in silence a few minutes, and jo watched him, wishing she had held her tongue, for his eyes looked angry, though his lips smiled as if at her warnings. roses covered the walls of the house, draped the cornices, climbed the pillars, and ran riot over the balustrade of the wide terrace, whence one looked down on the sunny mediterranean, and the white-walled city on its shore. ” “i don’t want you to do anything but be civil to him and help to the pudding. your indifference is half affectation, and a good stirring up would prove it. “don’t you read german?” asked miss kate with a look of surprise. so the spring days came and went, the sky grew clearer, the earth greener, the flowers were up fairly early, and the birds came back in time to say goodbye to beth, who, like a tired but trustful child, clung to the hands that had led her all her life, as father and mother guided her tenderly through the valley of the shadow, and gave her up to god. it was play then, but there came a time when i was truly grateful that i not only possessed the will but the power to cook wholesome food for my little girls, and help myself when i could no longer afford to hire help. ” “she’s very busy. march. we have had trouble since i saw you last. they crimped and curled her hair, they polished her neck and arms with some fragrant powder, touched her lips with coralline salve to make them redder, and hortense would have added ‘a soupcon of rouge’, if meg had not rebelled. 1. it was not a happy evening, for though they sewed as usual, while their mother read aloud from bremer, scott, or edgeworth, something was wanting, and the sweet home peace was disturbed. ” “am i selfish?” the question slipped out involuntarily and in a tone of surprise, for the one virtue on which he prided himself was generosity. a group of girls were standing about may’s table, admiring the pretty things, and talking over the change of saleswomen. as one of these packets contained characteristic notes from the party, we will rob an imaginary mail, and read them. the knight wished intensely that he could free them, but he was poor and could only go by each day, watching for the sweet face and longing to see it out in the sunshine. meg danced and flirted, chattered and giggled, as the other girls did. “annie moffat has blue and pink bows on her nightcaps. one day, as he went prancing down a quiet street, he saw at the window of a ruinous castle the lovely face. it’s really refreshing to see a sensible, straightforward girl, who can be jolly and kind without making a fool of herself. don’t cry, child, it worries me to hear people sniff. i don’t think i shall care to have much to do with any of them, except one sweetfaced maiden lady, who looks as if she had something in her. ” “why not? is he ill?” “la, no miss, but he’s had a scene with mr. as laurie turned the bend, he shouted back. oh, when these hidden stores of ours lie open to the father’s sight, may they be rich in golden hours, deeds that show fairer for the light, lives whose brave music long shall ring, like a spirit-stirring strain, souls that shall gladly soar and sing in the long sunshine after rain. “because they are mean is no reason why i should be. those are people whom it’s a satisfaction to help, for if they’ve got genius, it’s an honor to be allowed to serve them, and not let it be lost or delayed for want of fuel to keep the pot boiling. meg cheerfully blackened and burned her white hands cooking delicate messes for ‘the dear’, while amy, a loyal slave of the ring, celebrated her return by giving away as many of her treasures as she could prevail on her sisters to accept. “what a trying world it is!” said jo, rumpling up her hair in a fretful way. you’ll go with us, of course? aunt will be charmed. “i shall take the cream and the muffings,” added amy, heroically giving up the article she most liked. march. “yes, my boy teddy. the reader suddenly sat up, cast away the paper, displaying a flushed countenance, and with a funny mixture of solemnity and excitement replied in a loud voice, “your sister. “rich people have no right to sit down and enjoy themselves, or let their money accumulate for others to waste. march smiled her wise smile, as jo turned back the leaves to read what amy said of laurie. i won’t have anything of the sort in my house. ” when john spoke in that masterful tone, meg always obeyed, and never regretted her docility. ” “who was jimmy?” asked amy, who liked to have things explained as they went along. i go because i think you’d feel happier than if i was left behind. tudor’s uncle had married an english lady who was third cousin to a living lord, and amy regarded the whole family with great respect, for in spite of her american birth and breeding, she possessed that reverence for titles which haunts the best of us—that unacknowledged loyalty to the early faith in kings which set the most democratic nation under the sun in ferment at the coming of a royal yellow-haired laddie, some years ago, and which still has something to do with the love the young country bears the old, like that of a big son for an imperious little mother, who held him while she could, and let him go with a farewell scolding when he rebelled. “here’s a landscape!” thought laurie, peeping through the bushes, and looking wide-awake and good-natured already. give me that unselfish nature, that with charity divine can pardon wrong for love’s dear sake— meek heart, forgive me mine! thus our parting daily loseth something of its bitter pain, and while learning this hard lesson, my great loss becomes my gain. “he has promised to be very good today, and he can be perfectly elegant if he likes,” returned amy, and gliding away to warn hercules to beware of the dragon, which warning caused him to haunt the old lady with a devotion that nearly distracted her. if one girl likes another, she gives her a lime. “how kind you are! yes, that’s what it wanted. there’s no place like america for us workers, miss margaret. you don’t want to be sick, do you?” “no, i’m sure i don’t, but i dare say i shall be, for i’ve been with beth all the time. brown, soft-eyed children ran out from the quaint stone hovels to offer nosegays, or bunches of oranges still on the bough. to westminster abbey, but don’t expect me to describe it, that’s impossible, so i’ll only say it was sublime! this evening we are going to see fechter, which will be an appropriate end to the happiest day of my life. now then. ” “what did you think of?” “handsome faces—eyes particularly,” answered meg, smiling to herself in the dark. “you may try your experiment for a week and see how you like it. whether it ever rises again, depends upon the reception given the first act of the domestic drama called _little women_. i had a hard time, jo, and shed a good many bitter tears over my failures, for in spite of my efforts i never seemed to get on. but, you see, jo wasn’t a heroine, she was only a struggling human girl like hundreds of others, and she just acted out her nature, being sad, cross, listless, or energetic, as the mood suggested. “finish this story while i set my heel,” said jo, handing him the book. this cave was made with a clothes horse for a roof, bureaus for walls, and in it was a small furnace in full blast, with a black pot on it and an old witch bending over it. i read every morning, try to be good all day, and sing myself to sleep with father’s tune. ” “that’s bad. “i’m not afraid of anything,” returned jo, with a toss of the head. jo still looked like a thunder cloud, and nothing went well all day. we haven’t been here a great while, you know, but we have got acquainted with all our neighbors but you. bhaer?” said minnie. they did not forget their motto, but hoping and keeping busy seemed to grow easier, and after such tremendous exertions, they felt that endeavor deserved a holiday, and gave it a good many. lotty, with teutonic phlegm, was calmly eating bread and currant wine, for the jelly was still in a hopelessly liquid state, while mrs. they never asked why she sang about her work, did up her hair three times a day, and got so blooming with her evening exercise. jo helps me with the sewing, and insists on doing all sorts of hard jobs. i’m going to bed. ” “we will. he never spoke of himself, and no one ever knew that in his native city he had been a man much honored and esteemed for learning and integrity, till a countryman came to see him. it was a little thing, but it went straight to their hearts, and in spite of their brave resolutions, they all broke down and cried bitterly. “see, papa, aren’t they pretty?” added flo sentimentally. she called me to her and kissed me, and put it on my finger, and said i was a credit to her, and she’d like to keep me always. men always croak when they are hungry,” and jo whisked out at the front door after that. a regular snow maiden, with blue eyes, and yellow hair curling on her shoulders, pale and slender, and always carrying herself like a young lady mindful of her manners. she obediently descended, and made as light of the prank as she could without betraying meg or forgetting the truth. 1. i knew you wouldn’t care. “jo can do it, and be happy in it. they were all there, his grandfather—oh, so proud—mr. ” “now really, jo, you ought to treat me with more respect,” began laurie, who enjoyed it all immensely. while these internal revolutions were going on, her external life had been as busy and uneventful as usual, and if she sometimes looked serious or a little sad no one observed it but professor bhaer. ” said beth, ten days after mrs. march and jo were deep in their own affairs, when a sound from meg made them look up to see her staring at her note with a frightened face. no one had time to think of him again till, as meg ran through the entry, with a pair of rubbers in one hand and a cup of tea in the other, she came suddenly upon mr. ” chapter thirty-three jo’s journal new york, november dear marmee and beth, i’m going to write you a regular volume, for i’ve got heaps to tell, though i’m not a fine young lady traveling on the continent. ” a careful explanation followed, to which he listened so attentively that his anxious grandmother said, “my dear, do you think it wise to talk about such things to that baby? he’s getting great bumps over his eyes, and learning to ask the most unanswerable questions. i’ve laid in a heap of books, and i’m going to improve my shining hours reading on my perch in the old apple tree, when i’m not having l——” “don’t say ‘larks!’” implored amy, as a return snub for the ‘samphire’ correction. mr. presently beth and amy woke to rummage and find their little books also, one dove-colored, the other blue, and all sat looking at and talking about them, while the east grew rosy with the coming day. clasp your hands so, and stagger across the room, crying frantically, ‘roderigo! save me! save me!’” and away went jo, with a melodramatic scream which was truly thrilling. ” “i have no doubt of it, but are these your only reasons for this sudden fancy?” “no, mother. ” “i forgot that english people rather turn up their noses at governesses and don’t treat them as we do,” said meg, looking after the retreating figure with an annoyed expression. oh, do come soon to your loving. i witnessed her will, and it is to be so,” whispered esther smiling. meg was entertaining sallie gardiner in the parlor, when the door flew open and a floury, crocky, flushed, and disheveled figure appeared, demanding tartly. laurence marched to and fro in the parlor, feeling that he would rather face a rebel battery than mrs. “if i tell mine, will you tell yours?” “yes, if the girls will too. that was unpardonable, and amy took no more notice of him for a long while, except a word now and then when she came to her chaperon between the dances for a necessary pin or a moment’s rest. jo understood why laurie ‘primmed up his mouth’ when speaking of kate, for that young lady had a standoff-don’t-touch-me air, which contrasted strongly with the free and easy demeanor of the other girls. “sallie isn’t a poor man’s wife, and many maids are in keeping with her fine establishment. a second look showed her that the living eyes, under the bushy eyebrows, were kinder even than the painted ones, and there was a sly twinkle in them, which lessened her fear a good deal. ” when amy had whetted her tongue and freed her mind she usually got the best of it, for she seldom failed to have common sense on her side, while jo carried her love of liberty and hate of conventionalities to such an unlimited extent that she naturally found herself worsted in an argument. ” she was back at her post in an instant, and to her excited eyes a great change seemed to have taken place. ” “quite right and proper. your father and i have agreed that she shall not bind herself in any way, nor be married, before twenty. hannah is faithfulness itself, and our good neighbor will guard you as if you were his own. everyone likes and respects him, and i’m proud to think he cares for me, though i’m so poor and young and silly,” said meg, looking prettier than ever in her earnestness. amy felt the shade of coldness in his manner, and said to herself. a pleasant old garden on the borders of the lovely lake, with chestnuts rustling overhead, ivy climbing everywhere, and the black shadow of the tower falling far across the sunny water. ” esther was truly pious, and quite sincere in her advice, for she had an affectionate heart, and felt much for the sisters in their anxiety. perhaps he’ll help act. “no doubt about the weather today, they will certainly come, so we must fly round and be ready for them,” said amy, as the sun woke her next morning. march would not leave beth’s side, but rested in the big chair, waking often to look at, touch, and brood over her child, like a miser over some recovered treasure. it is so inexpressibly comfortable to have you here,” was meg’s answer. at nice, laurie had lounged and amy had scolded. i shall always be fond of you, very fond indeed, as a friend, but i’ll never marry you, and the sooner you believe it the better for both of us—so now!” that speech was like gunpowder. the poor fellow had temptations enough from without and from within, but he withstood them pretty well, for much as he valued liberty, he valued good faith and confidence more, so his promise to his grandfather, and his desire to be able to look honestly into the eyes of the women who loved him, and say “all’s well,” kept him safe and steady. mine is dishes and dusters, and envying girls with nice pianos, and being afraid of people. he feels badly because you didn’t believe him when he said he couldn’t tell. no sooner had the guest paid the usual stale compliments and bowed himself out, than jenny, under pretense of asking an important question, informed mr. bhaer stood stroking her pretty hair with a fatherly look that made me think she must be his own, though she looked more french than german. you ought to marry well and help your family. march had taken her place as nurse, and bade her rest, exercise, and amuse herself after her long confinement. the girls are used to such things, and i want my lunch to be proper and elegant, though i do work for my living. “i was wrong, i didn’t know. ” but it was too late. “well, they went to the bottom, and a nice mermaid welcomed them, but was much grieved on finding the box of headless knights, and kindly pickled them in brine, hoping to discover the mystery about them, for being a woman, she was curious. “oh, dear, what a blunderbuss i am!” exclaimed jo, finishing meg’s glove by scrubbing her gown with it. i’d rather you wouldn’t,” said meg, taking a naughty satisfaction in trying her lover’s patience and her own power. oh, mother, help me, do help me!” “i will, my child, i will. “dis is mine effalunt!” added tina, holding on by the professor’s hair. sinners told their sins to the pure-hearted old man and were both rebuked and saved. we’ll stop at meg’s, and borrow her white sunshade, and then you can have my dove-colored one. “thank you, i will. jo thought she was asleep, she lay so still, and putting down her book, sat looking at her with wistful eyes, trying to see signs of hope in the faint color on beth’s cheeks. “my dearest margaret, “i can no longer restrain my passion, and must know my fate before i return. “there he is,” thought jo, “poor boy! all alone and sick this dismal day. ” “don’t have any secrets, jo. i’m tired of dawdling, and mean to work like a man. ” laurie retired to the window, and jo told her story. forgive me, dear, i can’t help seeing that you are very lonely, and sometimes there is a hungry look in your eyes that goes to my heart. “such fun! only see! a regular note of invitation from mrs. everybody liked her, for among her good gifts was tact. she felt comforted at once by the sympathy and confidence given her. praise be given! oh, my goodness me!” before the girls could believe the happy truth, the doctor came to confirm it. but he wasn’t, for the moment his father peeped at him, demi’s eyes opened, his little chin began to quiver, and he put up his arms, saying with a penitent hiccough, “me’s dood, now. try away, deary, you’ll get your reward some day, and no one will be more delighted than i shall. read it,” said meg. wish you’d been there to see. ” “you are going somewhere with laurie, i know you are. half a dozen jovial lads were talking about skates in another part of the room, and she longed to go and join them, for skating was one of the joys of her life. laurence was the biggest one, but after he had called, said something funny or kind to each one of the girls, and talked over old times with their mother, nobody felt much afraid of him, except timid beth. a lace handkerchief, a plumy fan, and a bouquet in a shoulder holder finished her off, and miss belle surveyed her with the satisfaction of a little girl with a newly dressed doll. shut the window, like a good boy, and wait till i come. i had a very happy new year, after all, and when i thought it over in my room, i felt as if i was getting on a little in spite of my many failures, for i’m cheerful all the time now, work with a will, and take more interest in other people than i used to, which is satisfactory. “if i shall not be monsieur de trop, i will so gladly see them all. “instantly, sir what’s-his-name recovered himself, pitched the tyrant out of the window, and turned to join the lady, victorious, but with a bump on his brow, found the door locked, tore up the curtains, made a rope ladder, got halfway down when the ladder broke, and he went headfirst into the moat, sixty feet below. leave these things to time. there was great indignation at home when she told her story that evening. march was herself again directly, read the message over, and stretched out her arms to her daughters, saying, in a tone they never forgot, “i shall go at once, but it may be too late. such sights as i saw, my dear! it was as good as punch, for there were fat dowagers rolling about in their red and yellow coaches, with gorgeous jeameses in silk stockings and velvet coats, up behind, and powdered coachmen in front. the air was dark with davises, and many joneses gamboled like a flock of young giraffes. we ought to have our roll of directions, like christian. that was the hard minute, but the girls stood it well. i wish i could see you for a good talk, marmee. it was evident that his mind was not in working order yet, and his ideas needed clarifying, for often in the middle of a plaintive strain, he would find himself humming a dancing tune that vividly recalled the christmas ball at nice, especially the stout frenchman, and put an effectual stop to tragic composition for the time being. it isn’t what it should be, but you have improved it,” he added, as she snapped the silver bracelet on her wrist. jo’s one strong point was the fruit, for she had sugared it well, and had a pitcher of rich cream to eat with it. she could not think it right to deceive her mother, but she had been bidden to mind hannah, and hannah wouldn’t hear of ‘mrs. “you ought to have sent word, or told me this morning, and you ought to have remembered how busy i was,” continued meg petulantly, for even turtledoves will peck when ruffled. but your absurd words are as bad as jo’s slang. now she seemed to have on the professor’s mental or moral spectacles also, for the faults of these poor stories glared at her dreadfully and filled her with dismay. the art table was the most attractive in the room. “happy as a queen, the dear! every soul of ’em is upstairs a worshipin’. “gracious, i hope not! half of some of your things wouldn’t suit me at all. as he sat down beside her, amy felt shy again, and turned rosy red at the recollection of her impulsive greeting. dashwood had taken the manuscript, and was turning over the leaves with a pair of rather dirty fingers, and casting critical glances up and down the neat pages. “here is one. after studying himself to a skeleton all the week, a fellow deserves petting and ought to get it. forgive me, i meant it kindly. i’ll go ask her. the cook was bad-tempered, the old coachman was deaf, and esther the only one who ever took any notice of the young lady. feeling indignant that he was not taken into his tutor’s confidence, he set his wits to work to devise some proper retaliation for the slight. under the circumstances, what could jo do but greet him civilly, and invite him in? if she was tired of his visits, she concealed her weariness with perfect skill, and took care that there should be coffee for supper, “as friedrich—i mean mr. “jo” on the next lid, scratched and worn, and within a motley store of headless dolls, of schoolbooks torn, birds and beasts that speak no more, spoils brought home from the fairy ground only trod by youthful feet, dreams of a future never found, memories of a past still sweet, half-writ poems, stories wild, april letters, warm and cold, diaries of a wilful child, hints of a woman early old, a woman in a lonely home, hearing, like a sad refrain— “be worthy, love, and love will come,” in the falling summer rain. it was a lovely drive, along winding roads rich in the picturesque scenes that delight beauty-loving eyes. “where’s the use of looking nice, when no one sees me but those cross midgets, and no one cares whether i’m pretty or not?” she muttered, shutting her drawer with a jerk. please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. jo gave a despairing groan, and meg laughed outright, while beth let her bread burn as she watched the fun with interest. i say he may come, and his grandpa, too, if he likes. shan’t i stop now?’” “she caught up her knitting, which had dropped out of her hands, gave me a sharp look through her specs, and said, in her short way, ‘finish the chapter, and don’t be impertinent, miss’. “i think it was so splendid in father to go as chaplain when he was too old to be drafted, and not strong enough for a soldier,” said meg warmly. i wish i could say something to comfort you for the loss of dear little beth, but i can only feel, and. she tried to forget it, but could not, and kept repeating to herself, “mrs. now i know mother will shake her head, and the girls say, “oh, the mercenary little wretch!”, but i’ve made up my mind, and if fred asks me, i shall accept him, though i’m not madly in love. her face is rather thin and pale just now, with watching and anxiety, but i like to look at it, for it has grown gentler, and her voice is lower. there’s no knowing what may happen, and i wished to be prepared. “please don’t—it’s—it’s mine,” murmured amy, with a face nearly as red as her fish. forgive each other, help each other, and begin again tomorrow. and mrs. jo would whistle and make a great racket getting ready. i rather miss my wild girl, but if i get a strong, helpful, tenderhearted woman in her place, i shall feel quite satisfied. mrs. ” “oh, the little villain! that’s the way he meant to pay me for keeping my word to mother. ” that evening while meg was writing to her father to report the traveler’s safe arrival, jo slipped upstairs into beth’s room, and finding her mother in her usual place, stood a minute twisting her fingers in her hair, with a worried gesture and an undecided look. “yes, i gave up hoping then, but i didn’t like to own it. it was not a wise thing to do, but i kept on worrying till an old man came in with an order for some clothes. there’s one thing you can do well, jo, that is, wear a shawl. he said nothing, but little things showed it. we don’t want any more marrying in this family for years to come. i must go!” “i’m afraid it’s impossible, jo. “try, then. “i do want him to think i look well, and tell them so at home,” said amy to herself, as she put on flo’s old white silk ball dress, and covered it with a cloud of fresh illusion, out of which her white shoulders and golden head emerged with a most artistic effect. ” “aren’t you company too? i thought she’d suit brooke, but he keeps talking to meg, and kate just stares at them through that ridiculous glass of hers. even the sad, sour sisters should be kindly dealt with, because they have missed the sweetest part of life, if for no other reason. wasn’t that fun, girls? i like traveling. “bless the child! she’s gone and put ‘mother’ on them instead of ‘m. i’ve begun to model a figure of baby, and laurie says it is the best thing i’ve ever done. gutenberg. feeling this, jo’s burden seemed easier to bear, duty grew sweeter, and life looked more endurable, seen from the safe shelter of her mother’s arms. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by u. ” “he is rich, a gentleman, and has delightful manners,” began amy, trying to be quite cool and dignified, but feeling a little ashamed of herself, in spite of the sincerity of her intentions. a slight incident gave jo the clue to the mystery, she thought, and lively fancy, loving heart did the rest. he does know how to manage them, and will be a great help, for demi is getting too much for me. she stood and stared at him for a minute, looking both surprised and displeased, then walked on, saying sharply, “how do you know?” “saw it. it’s a little thing to do, but it gives her pleasure, and i don’t believe it will hurt your things half so much as letting dirty dogs and clumping boys spoil them. nobody ever knew what went on in the parlor that afternoon, but a great deal of talking was done, and quiet mr. i see it, and so does mother. was the joy all for the boys? then on hearing his destination, she said, “so far away!” in a tone of despair that lifted him on to a pinnacle of hope, but the next minute she tumbled him down again by observing, like one entirely absorbed in the matter. i can feed and nurse and pet and scold them, and mother will be my stand-by. meg couldn’t refuse the offer so kindly made, for a desire to see if she would be ‘a little beauty’ after touching up caused her to accept and forget all her former uncomfortable feelings toward the moffats. she has such a passion for it, i often tell her if everything else fails, she can be a horsebreaker, and get her living so. ” he started as if he had been shot, threw up his head, and cried out in a fierce tone, “don’t tell me that, jo, i can’t bear it now!” “tell what?” she asked, wondering at his violence. he saw the look, knit his heavy eyebrows, rubbed his hands, and marched abruptly away, saying he’d be back directly. i’m going into business with a devotion that shall delight grandfather, and prove to him that i’m not spoiled. meg helped jo clear away the remains of the feast, which took half the afternoon and left them so tired that they agreed to be contented with tea and toast for supper. he just stood looking at her so wistfully, so tenderly, that she found her heart relenting in spite of herself. i only meant to change the little bottle for a big one, and i gave all my money to get it, and i’m truly trying not to be selfish any more. it was easy to keep her secret, for no name appeared with her stories. the revel was at its height when a priest appeared, and withdrawing the young pair to an alcove, hung with purple velvet, he motioned them to kneel. mr. i only did as i’d be done by. ” “i hope the vaughns are not fine grown-up people. ” “mercy on us. ’ ’tisn’t! some make fun of it, some overpraise, and nearly all insist that i had a deep theory to expound, when i only wrote it for the pleasure and the money. i only wanted a little fun, but this sort doesn’t pay, i find, and i’m getting tired of it. god was not a blind force, and immortality was not a pretty fable, but a blessed fact. mrs. ” and miss kate read one of the most beautiful passages in a perfectly correct but perfectly expressionless manner. brooke, you are very kind, but i agree with father that i am too young to enter into any engagement at present, so please say no more, but let us be friends as we were. it’s your duty to make a rich match and it ought to be impressed upon you. ” “open me. there were no marble-topped tables, long mirrors, or lace curtains in the little parlor, but simple furniture, plenty of books, a fine picture or two, a stand of flowers in the bay window, and, scattered all about, the pretty gifts which came from friendly hands and were the fairer for the loving messages they brought. you were very naughty, and it is hard to forgive the loss of her precious little book, but i think she might do it now, and i guess she will, if you try her at the right minute,” said meg. “my dear, don’t get angry about it, and i will tell you how it happened. beth’s bird began to chirp again, and a half-blown rose was discovered on amy’s bush in the window. come, jo, you and beth will go, won’t you?” “of course we will. wrongdoing always brings its own punishment, and when jo most needed hers, she got it. “i hadn’t the least idea of selling my hair at first, but as i went along i kept thinking what i could do, and feeling as if i’d like to dive into some of the rich stores and help myself. “saint laurence on a gridiron,” added laurie, blandly finishing the sentence. “fib number one. i try to be contented, but it is hard, and i’m tired of being poor. brooke, and conversation languished. ” while making these maternal inquiries mrs. i’ll lift my eyebrows if any thing is wrong, and nod if you are all right. brooke, drying her tears on daisy’s bib with an injured air. it doesn’t for me, and furbelows only worry me. jo happened to suit aunt march, who was lame and needed an active person to wait upon her. in spite of various very natural temptations to resent and retaliate, amy adhered to her resolution all the next day, bent on conquering her enemy by kindness. ” “yours, mother? why, you are never angry!” and for the moment jo forgot remorse in surprise. “indeed, sir, i cannot tell. “my sister beth is a very fastidious girl, when she likes to be,” said amy, well pleased at beth’s success. it isn’t the thing. accept a ribbon red, i beg, for madam purrer’s tail, and ice cream made by lovely peg, a mont blanc in a pail. then they got to talking about books, and to jo’s delight, she found that laurie loved them as well as she did, and had read even more than herself. what the dickens does the fellow expect?” and the old gentleman looked a trifle ashamed of his own testiness. hannah never forgot to make them, no matter how busy or grumpy she might be, for the walk was long and bleak. “how did you ever get aunt to agree?” “it was hard work, but between us, we talked her over, for we had heaps of good reasons on our side. not a very romantic story, but it interested me, and i was glad to hear that mrs. that was the name of the little brown house mr. feeling almost happy again, she laid by a few ferns and roses for herself, and quickly made up the rest in dainty bouquets for the breasts, hair, or skirts of her friends, offering them so prettily that clara, the elder sister, told her she was ‘the sweetest little thing she ever saw’, and they looked quite charmed with her small attention. sweet voices and rich melody filled the air, and so with mirth and music the masquerade went on. then he’s rich and generous and good, and loves us all, and i say it’s a pity my plan is spoiled. jo glanced into them, and when she came to her own, leaned her chin on the edge, and stared absently at the chaotic collection, till a bundle of old exercise books caught her eye. i wanted to amuse him one night when you were all away, and he was rather dismal. “yes, aunt. a call at meg’s, and a refreshing sniff and sip at the daisy and demijohn, still further fortified her for the tete-a-tete, but when she saw a stalwart figure looming in the distance, she had a strong desire to turn about and run away. “jo would find us out, and spoil it all. ” “we all will,” cried meg. ” “who, sir?” stopping to listen. then the two invalids were ordered to repose, which they did, by both sitting in one big chair and talking hard. the lady was young, blonde, and dressed in blue. they had laughed over that last word as if the idea it suggested was a most preposterous one, but they had held to their resolve, and whenever they could get on without help they did so, and no one interfered, for mrs. the beautiful, kind eyes are larger, and in them lies an expression that saddens one, although it is not sad itself. ” amy got no farther, for jo’s hot temper mastered her, and she shook amy till her teeth chattered in her head, crying in a passion of grief and anger. what a cozy room this is!” “it might be if it was kept nice, but the maids are lazy, and i don’t know how to make them mind. ed. which is which?” and laurie bent like a well-sweep to examine the prodigies. and a young man by the name of teddy. she gets prettier every day, and i’m in love with her sometimes. he looked so troubled that i forgot all about myself, and asked what the matter was. he did not do much, but he thought a great deal and was conscious of a change of some sort going on in spite of himself. “i wish i knew where all these pretty things would go when aunt march dies,” she said, as she slowly replaced the shining rosary and shut the jewel cases one by one. i’ve something to say to you, and i must free my mind at once. ” at that minute jo was particularly absorbed in dressmaking, for she was mantua-maker general to the family, and took especial credit to herself because she could use a needle as well as a pen. framed in a brilliant scrollwork of scarlet, blue and gold, with little spirits of good will helping one another up and down among the thorns and flowers, were the words, “thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. “not a soul, my dear. ” and meg tried to keep her countenance, amy looked so grave and important. “i read in _pilgrim’s progress_ today how, after many troubles, christian and hopeful came to a pleasant green meadow where lilies bloomed all year round, and there they rested happily, as we do now, before they went on to their journey’s end,” answered beth, adding, as she slipped out of her father’s arms and went to the instrument, “it’s singing time now, and i want to be in my old place. now come and hear the letter. amy was up at dawn, hustling people out of their beds and through their breakfasts, that the house might be got in order. “we never are too old for this, my dear, because it is a play we are playing all the time in one way or another. how still the room was as they listened breathlessly, how strangely the day darkened outside, and how suddenly the whole world seemed to change, as the girls gathered about their mother, feeling as if all the happiness and support of their lives was about to be taken from them. “and so nice of annie moffat not to forget her promise. the knight agreed to try, and got on slowly but surely, for the colt was a gallant fellow, and soon learned to love his new master, though he was freakish and wild. ” “how is your grandfather? when did you come? where are you staying?” “very well—last night—at the chauvain. but soon even these intervals of consciousness ended, and she lay hour after hour, tossing to and fro, with incoherent words on her lips, or sank into a heavy sleep which brought her no refreshment. in spite of this affliction, she looked unusually gay and graceful as she glided away. that same morning, a little girl in a brown hat and blue dress, with a round face and snub nose, went and bought it for her mother. i’ll buy you quarts if you want it, but for heaven’s sake don’t have hysterics, for i’ve brought jack scott home to dinner, and. another little visit to the seashore would suit her better, and as grandma could not be prevailed upon to leave the babies, jo took beth down to the quiet place, where she could live much in the open air, and let the fresh sea breezes blow a little color into her pale cheeks. no stockings hung at the fireplace, and for a moment she felt as much disappointed as she did long ago, when her little sock fell down because it was crammed so full of goodies. after some delay, the object of her desire was procured, likewise a bottle of dressing to prevent further loss of time at home, and off she drove again, well pleased with her own forethought. they felt this most when singing time came, for beth could only play, jo stood dumb as a stone, and amy broke down, so meg and mother sang alone. i haf waited so long, i am grown selfish, as thou wilt find, professorin. her little airs and graces were much admired, so were her accomplishments, for besides her drawing, she could play twelve tunes, crochet, and read french without mispronouncing more than two-thirds of the words. ” “what do you like best?” asked jo. i know where meg’s glove is. i shall have to do a deal of traveling before i come in sight of your celestial city. say nothing to madame, but when she sleeps go you and sit alone a while to think good thoughts, and pray the dear god preserve your sister. ” “but you will after a while, and then what will become of me?” “you’ll love someone else too, like a sensible boy, and forget all this trouble. you have made a slave of yourself long enough. ” as the tears streamed fast down poor jo’s cheeks, she stretched out her hand in a helpless sort of way, as if groping in the dark, and laurie took it in his, whispering as well as he could with a lump in his throat, “i’m here. couldn’t she, wouldn’t she—and let him come home and be happy? while waiting for an answer he did nothing, but he did it energetically, for he was in a fever of impatience. ” “which lady here do you think prettiest?” said sallie. laurie haunted the house like a restless ghost, and mr. the only person who offered enough to make it worth her while to try juvenile literature was a worthy gentleman who felt it his mission to convert all the world to his particular belief. she didn’t like the new tone, for though not blase, it sounded indifferent in spite of the look. march, but jo broke in. the jungfrau to beth god bless you, dear queen bess! may nothing you dismay, but health and peace and happiness be yours, this christmas day. now take these disgusting things two by two, and throw them out of the window. what do you amuse yourself with?” “nothing. ” “about meg?” “how quickly you guessed! yes, it’s about her, and though it’s a little thing, it fidgets me. contributions to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by u. “i don’t remember much about it, except that i was afraid of the cellar and the dark entry, and always liked the cake and milk we had up at the top. she had a feeling that father and mother would not approve, and preferred to have her own way first, and beg pardon afterward. “i beg your pardon. give him one lesson, and then there will be an end of it. “yes, laurie,” very low. “i’m doing my best, ma’am, but can’t get much higher, i’m afraid, as six feet is about all men can do in these degenerate days,” responded the young gentleman, whose head was about level with the little chandelier. don’t tell anyone, it’s all over now. ” “you have said that a dozen times within the last three weeks. “each of you told what your burden was just now, except beth. women work a good many miracles, and i have a persuasion that they may perform even that of raising the standard of manhood by refusing to echo such sayings. ” “oh, gracious! what shall i say?” cried sallie, as fred ended his rigmarole, in which he had jumbled together pell-mell nautical phrases and facts out of one of his favorite books. ‘up with the jib, reef the tops’l halliards, helm hard alee, and man the guns!’ roared the captain, as a portuguese pirate hove in sight, with a flag black as ink flying from her foremast. but these were mere trifles, and they assured their mother that the experiment was working finely. then we’ll send amy off to aunt march’s for a spell, to keep her out of harm’s way, and one of you girls can stay at home and amuse beth for a day or two. ” jo obeyed, but as her hand went softly to and fro across beth’s hot forehead and wet eyelids, her heart was very full and she longed to speak. beth isn’t selfish, and that’s the reason everyone loves her and feels so bad at the thoughts of losing her. i’m very sorry, amy,” added beth, who was still a patroness of cats. he was tired of wandering about alone, and amy’s familiar presence seemed to give a homelike charm to the foreign scenes in which she bore a part. for a minute a wild desire to run away possessed her, but that was cowardly, and the girls would laugh at her, so she resolved to stay and get out of the scrape as she could. he had thought of jo in reaching after the thorny red rose, for vivid flowers became her, and she had often worn ones like that from the greenhouse at home. ” “you might treat him civilly, at least. “i’m the oldest,” began meg, but jo cut in with a decided, “i’m the man of the family now papa is away, and i shall provide the slippers, for he told me to take special care of mother while he was gone. “poor little soul, you look as if you’d grieved yourself half sick! i’m going to take care of you, so don’t cry any more, but come and walk about with me, the wind is too chilly for you to sit still,” he said, in the half-caressing, half-commanding way that amy liked, as he tied on her hat, drew her arm through his, and began to pace up and down the sunny walk under the new-leaved chestnuts. they got on excellently, for amy’s chief care was soon set at rest by learning that the gentleman would leave first, and she was chatting away in a peculiarly lofty strain, when the old lady got out. ” she began solemnly. three white-headed children peeped over the fence, and an objectionable dog barked at them from the other side of the river with all his might and main. one july day she came in with her hands full, and went about the house leaving letters and parcels like the penny post. amy was too well-bred, and just now laurie was too lazy, so in a minute he peeped under her hatbrim with an inquiring air. you are always a great comfort to me, teddy,” returned jo, gratefully shaking hands. laurie did not see, for he was carefully skating along the shore, sounding the ice, for a warm spell had preceded the cold snap. “yes. ” wasn’t that nonsensical? we only stopped at liverpool a few hours. then his eyes would turn to jo so wistfully that she would have surely answered the mute inquiry if she had seen it. “you will now stand on the platform till recess,” said mr. every stitch daisy’s patient little fingers had put into the handkerchiefs she hemmed was better than embroidery to mrs. “young man, when i first had the honor of making your acquaintance you hit me in the face. gutenberg. all that we have any business to know is that john did not appear to object, judging from the changes which gradually took place in the house and its inmates. “good evening, diana!” said laurie, with the look of satisfaction she liked to see in his eyes when they rested on her. laurie watched her in respectful silence, and when she beckoned him to his sofa, he sat down with a sigh of satisfaction, saying gratefully. it’s ridiculous, it won’t be allowed. i’m so sorry, but the tongs were too hot, and so i’ve made a mess,” groaned poor jo, regarding the little black pancakes with tears of regret. “is that my boy?” “as sure as this is my girl!” and laurie tucked her hand under his arm with the air of a man whose every wish was gratified. it won’t last long if you keep going. he consoled himself for the seeming disloyalty by the thought that jo’s sister was almost the same as jo’s self, and the conviction that it would have been impossible to love any other woman but amy so soon and so well. in fact, i rather like it, for she winds one round her finger as softly and prettily as a skein of silk, and makes you feel as if she was doing you a favor all the while. serve me right, selfish pig, to let you go, and stay writing rubbish myself!” muttered jo, as she went to consult hannah. mr. “you’ve gone and got married!” “yes, please, but i never will again,” and he went down upon his knees, with a penitent clasping of hands, and a face full of mischief, mirth, and triumph. ” now, jo did _not_ like to leave it, for mr. jo had burned the skin off her nose boating, and got a raging headache by reading too long. ” “the. she is the sun and i the wind, in the fable, and the sun managed the man best, you remember. you’d laugh to see meg head the table and try to be motherish. it was excellent drill for their memories, a harmless amusement, and employed many hours which otherwise would have been idle, lonely, or spent in less profitable society. brooke will scratch up a fortune somehow, carry her off, and make a hole in the family, and i shall break my heart, and everything will be abominably uncomfortable. everyone rides—old men, stout ladies, little children—and the young folks do a deal of flirting here, i saw a pair exchange rose buds, for it’s the thing to wear one in the button-hole, and i thought it rather a nice little idea. ” when she was a baby, jo had accidently dropped her into the coal hod, and amy insisted that the fall had ruined her nose forever. by and by beth said, with recovered serenity, “you’ll tell them this when we go home?” “i think they will see it without words,” sighed jo, for now it seemed to her that beth changed every day. ” “much obliged, but i’m busy. this entirely softens the stern sire. i shall always be prepared. ” “it does to me, remember that, my lad. laurence, i’m only laurie. but the new member was equal to the occasion, and rising, with a grateful salutation to the chair, said in the most engaging manner, “mr. ” “if jo is a tomboy and amy a goose, what am i, please?” asked beth, ready to share the lecture. you need the exercise, hannah would enjoy the rest, and john would find his wife again. the girls flew about, trying to make things comfortable, each in her own way. how jo did enjoy her ‘wilderness of boys’, and how poor, dear aunt march would have lamented had she been there to see the sacred precincts of prim, well-ordered plumfield overrun with toms, dicks, and harrys! there was a sort of poetic justice about it, after all, for the old lady had been the terror of the boys for miles around, and now the exiles feasted freely on forbidden plums, kicked up the gravel with profane boots unreproved, and played cricket in the big field where the irritable ‘cow with a crumpled horn’ used to invite rash youths to come and be tossed. but unfortunately demi’s most unconquerable prejudice was against going to bed, and that night he decided to go on a rampage. so amy sailed away to find the old world, which is always new and beautiful to young eyes, while her father and friend watched her from the shore, fervently hoping that none but gentle fortunes would befall the happy-hearted girl, who waved her hand to them till they could see nothing but the summer sunshine dazzling on the sea. “no, i drank champagne and romped and tried to flirt, and was altogether abominable,” said meg self-reproachfully. ” jo’s voice was more pathetic than she knew. “it’s the dampness drying,” replied jo. it was good to see him beam at ‘my children’, as he called the young pair. when all was settled, with fear and trembling she told laurie, but to her surprise he took it very quietly. now comes the serious part, for it happened here, and fred has just gone. meg was grateful to see that miss kate, though twenty, was dressed with a simplicity which american girls would do well to imitate, and who was much flattered by mr. as they came up onto the stone plateau that crowns the hill, amy waved her hand as if welcoming him to her favorite haunt, and said, pointing here and there, “do you remember the cathedral and the corso, the fishermen dragging their nets in the bay, and the lovely road to villa franca, schubert’s tower, just below, and best of all, that speck far out to sea which they say is corsica?” “i remember. the gentle apple’s winey juice. little notice was taken of her stories, but they found a market, and encouraged by this fact, she resolved to make a bold stroke for fame and fortune. o. beth played her gayest march, amy threw open the door, and meg enacted escort with great dignity. then polly had to be fed, the lap dog combed, and a dozen trips upstairs and down to get things or deliver orders, for the old lady was very lame and seldom left her big chair. “i ought to think so, for i haf a way opened to me by which i can make my bread and gif my junglings much help. bhaer down on his hands and knees, with tina on his back, kitty leading him with a jump rope, and minnie feeding two small boys with seedcakes, as they roared and ramped in cages built of chairs. “any more than it’s proper to wear all your bonnets and gowns and ribbons at once, that folks may know you’ve got them,” added jo, and the lecture ended in a laugh. know’st thou the land where the citron blooms, used to be the professor’s favorite line, for ‘das land’ meant germany to him, but now he seemed to dwell, with peculiar warmth and melody, upon the words. ” “not always,” and something in laurie’s voice made jo say hastily. “just a year ago we were groaning over the dismal christmas we expected to have. so was the plum pudding, which melted in one’s mouth, likewise the jellies, in which amy reveled like a fly in a honeypot. ” “try it and see. amy’s definition of jo’s idea of independence was such a good hit that both burst out laughing, and the discussion took a more amiable turn. “well, i wish i may die if it ain’t the queerest thing i ever see! the pianny has turned her head! she’d never have gone in her right mind,” cried hannah, staring after her, while the girls were rendered quite speechless by the miracle. ah me! such heavy days, such long, long nights, such aching hearts and imploring prayers, when those who loved her best were forced to see the thin hands stretched out to them beseechingly, to hear the bitter cry, “help me, help me!” and to feel that there was no help. you were poorly, and i worried about you till i fell sick myself. she longed to run to meet him, and beg pardon, and be kissed and comforted, as she was sure of being, but, of course, she did nothing of the sort, and when she saw john coming, began to hum quite naturally, as she rocked and sewed, like a lady of leisure in her best parlor. i beg your pardon for being so rude, but sometimes you forget to put down the curtain at the window where the flowers are. see, i found this and read it. and when the lamps are lighted, it’s like looking at a picture to see the fire, and you all around the table with your mother. beth smiled and felt comforted, for the tiny thing seemed to offer its small friendship and remind her that a pleasant world was still to be enjoyed. “no, you won’t. would you put some on mine?” she asked, as beth brought up a pile of snowy muslins, fresh from hannah’s hands. it was so homey and refreshing that i sat down on the floor and read and looked and ate and laughed and cried, in my usual absurd way. everybody dawdled that morning, and it was noon before the girls found energy enough even to take up their worsted work. beth and i can keep house perfectly well,” put in amy, with an important air. “you must be tired. “do you like your school?” asked the boy, changing the subject, after a little pause, during which he stared at the fire and jo looked about her, well pleased. “opy doy. the boys are at home, and we’ll have a comfortable time. we both laughed, begged each other’s pardon, and felt all good and comfortable again. it’s merely a matter of expediency, you see, my girls will naturally take the lead, and this table is considered their proper place. king talking very loud, and grace and ellen turned away their faces when they passed me, so i shouldn’t see how red and swollen their eyes were. i’ll get him, and tell it you are here. your english ‘you’ is so cold, say ‘thou’, heart’s dearest, it means so much to me,” pleaded mr. you can’t buy those soft shades, so we paint ours any color we like. “why do you always avoid mr. here, give me a bit of paper, and let us have done with this nonsense. “i don’t want a fashionable wedding, but only those about me whom i love, and to them i wish to look and be my familiar self. but by-and-by, when the teething worry was over and the idols went to sleep at proper hours, leaving mamma time to rest, she began to miss john, and find her workbasket dull company, when he was not sitting opposite in his old dressing gown, comfortably scorching his slippers on the fender. there never was such a woman for givin’ away vittles and drink, clothes and firin’,” replied hannah, who had lived with the family since meg was born, and was considered by them all more as a friend than a servant. “i shall lie abed late, and do nothing,” replied meg, from the depths of the rocking chair. oh, it would be all i should ask! and i’d rather have it than any title such as girls snap up so readily, and find nothing behind. no one minded it but herself, and it was doing its best to grow, but amy felt deeply the want of a grecian nose, and drew whole sheets of handsome ones to console herself. a universal favorite, thanks to money, manners, much talent, and the kindest heart that ever got its owner into scrapes by trying to get other people out of them, he stood in great danger of being spoiled, and probably would have been, like many another promising boy, if he had not possessed a talisman against evil in the memory of the kind old man who was bound up in his success, the motherly friend who watched over him as if he were her son, and last, but not least by any means, the knowledge that four innocent girls loved, admired, and believed in him with all their hearts. “what is a little mine?” “it is something which makes your body move, as the spring made the wheels go in my watch when i showed it to you. ” “why, jo?” and her mother looked up quickly, as if the words suggested a double meaning. there are some pleasant people in the house if you feel sociable, and your evenings are always free. brooke kissed meg entirely by mistake, as he somewhat incoherently explained. “now she’s mad. “now, my dear young ladies, remember what your ma said, and don’t fret. she rowed as well as she did many other things, and though she used both hands, and laurie but one, the oars kept time, and the boat went smoothly through the water. “stop that, or i’ll open the door and make you!” called out the young gentleman in a threatening tone. “dear old fellow! he couldn’t have got himself up with more care if he’d been going a-wooing,” said jo to herself, and then a sudden thought born of the words made her blush so dreadfully that she had to drop her ball, and go down after it to hide her face. the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united states. but, amy was a young pilgrim, and just now her burden seemed very heavy. ” and having pulled the boy’s hair by way of a caress, mr. esther had given her a rosary of black beads with a silver cross, but amy hung it up and did not use it, feeling doubtful as to its fitness for protestant prayers. bhaer had never told it. “please, ma’am, could i inquire if this highly instructive and charming institution is a new one?” “would you tell him?” asked meg of her sisters. it’s just the place for boys, the house is big, and the furniture strong and plain. but by-and-by, when i had four little daughters round me and we were poor, then the old trouble began again, for i am not patient by nature, and it tried me very much to see my children wanting anything. polly marched straight after it, stooped down and peeped under the bookcase, saying, in his funny way, with a cock of his eye, ‘come out and take a walk, my dear. if she’s mad with her, she eats one before her face, and doesn’t offer even a suck. uncle doesn’t know ten words, and insists on talking english very loud, as if it would make people understand him. she had not much time for repining, however, for the three young girls were busily employed in ‘having a good time’. brooke rather bitterly as he absently put the dead rose in the hole he had made and covered it up, like a little grave. “i understand. don’t make plans, jo, but let time and their own hearts mate your friends. “you’d come bringing it home under your arm without any paper, just to try me. ” chapter thirty-five heartache whatever his motive might have been, laurie studied to some purpose that year, for he graduated with honor, and gave the latin oration with the grace of a phillips and the eloquence of a demosthenes, so his friends said. ” “pin it round your neck, and then it will be useful,” said laurie, looking down at the little blue boots, which he evidently approved of. you are the best actress we’ve got, and there’ll be an end of everything if you quit the boards,” said jo. ” “i know it. “i like it,” said mrs. ” “like angels!” “yes, of course, but which rules?” “i don’t mind telling you that she does now, at least i let her think so, it pleases her, you know. a salute of twenty-four guns was fired on receipt of good news from washington, and a dress parade took place at headquarters. “it’s a love of a bonnet, but i prefer the face inside, for it looks young and happy again,” and john kissed the smiling face, to the great detriment of the rosebud under the chin. ” meg drew her aside, under pretense of pinning up a loose braid, and said approvingly, “it was dreadfully provoking, but you kept your temper, and i’m so glad, jo. he might just as well have turned a somersault and uttered an indian war whoop, for his face was so full of suppressed excitement and his voice so treacherously joyful that everyone jumped up, though he only said, in a queer, breathless voice, “here’s another christmas present for the march family. “too bad! i was looking for someone to give this to. talk it over with the girls, and whichever way you decide, i’ll do my best to help you. i’ll gossip and giggle, and have horrors and raptures over any trifle you like. don’t put your hands behind you, or stare, or say ‘christopher columbus!’ will you?” “don’t worry about me. as i told you in my letter when i wrote that amy had been so kind to me, i never shall stop loving you, but the love is altered, and i have learned to see that it is better as it is. i’m too used up to ‘exert’ myself for anyone. ” tearing off the blank side of one of her newly copied pages, jo drew the table before her mother, well knowing that money for the long, sad journey must be borrowed, and feeling as if she could do anything to add a little to the sum for her father. they did sober themselves for beth’s sake. but her heart was very heavy, she longed to be at home, and every day looked wistfully across the lake, waiting for laurie to come and comfort her. the excitement had hardly subsided when hannah appeared, with “mrs. it aches so, i can hardly stand, and i don’t know how i’m ever going to get home,” she said, rocking to and fro in pain. ambitious men caught glimpses of nobler ambitions than their own, and even worldlings confessed that his beliefs were beautiful and true, although ‘they wouldn’t pay’. ” “then you fancy that meg is not interested in john?” “who?” cried jo, staring. here’s fruit to feed our busy bee, and flowers for her nose. i’ll talk for hours about them when i come, but haven’t time to write. ” “what do you know about him?” asked laurie, grateful for the good advice, but objecting to the lecture, and glad to turn the conversation from himself after his unusual outbreak. jo announced that the coffee was ready, and everyone settled themselves to a hearty meal, for youth is seldom dyspeptic, and exercise develops wholesome appetites. “they are quite worn out. jo grew quite white, flew out of her chair, and the moment he stopped speaking she electrified him by throwing her arms round his neck, and crying out, with a joyful cry, “oh, laurie! oh, mother! i am so glad!” she did not weep again, but laughed hysterically, and trembled and clung to her friend as if she was a little bewildered by the sudden news. this new order of things disgusted him, and he howled dismally for ‘marmar’, as his angry passions subsided, and recollections of his tender bondwoman returned to the captive autocrat. ” “how provoking you are! i don’t approve of cigars and i will only allow it on condition that you let me put you into my sketch. next day, having seen both the old and young gentleman out of the house, beth, after two or three retreats, fairly got in at the side door, and made her way as noiselessly as any mouse to the drawing room where her idol stood. “when i went to get some oysters for hannah, mr. her face is right opposite, and it looks so sweet behind the flowers, i can’t help watching it. “i need it so much. she said nothing of her plan at home, but fell to work next day, much to the disquiet of her mother, who always looked a little anxious when ‘genius took to burning’. charcoal portraits came next, and the entire family hung in a row, looking as wild and crocky as if just evoked from a coalbin. bhaer could read several languages, but he had not learned to read women yet. ” “no, dear, run along, and bring me some coffee. have i been all that to you, jo?” she asked, with wistful, humble earnestness. take that scott up to mother’s, and tell him i’m away, sick, dead, anything. she never knew that mr. out in our garden is an apple tree that has a nice low branch, so jo put the saddle on it, fixed some reins on the part that turns up, and we bounce away on ellen tree whenever we like. of course, demi tyrannized over daisy, and gallantly defended her from every other aggressor, while daisy made a galley slave of herself, and adored her brother as the one perfect being in the world. “they are for miss march, the man said. “she is growing better, i am sure of it, my dear. “bless you, child! mother told me. she had just copied them with great care, and had destroyed the old manuscript, so that amy’s bonfire had consumed the loving work of several years. march: your husband is very ill. ” mr. f. brooke, still watching the river, and playing with the wild rose in his buttonhole. is it a donkey?” asked grace curiously. then he avoided the tender subject altogether, wrote philosophical notes to jo, turned studious, and gave out that he was going to ‘dig’, intending to graduate in a blaze of glory. ” “suppose you learn plain cooking. it will do me good, and my old bones won’t suffer, for traveling nowadays is almost as easy as sitting in a chair. ” “bless me, child, you will have to charter an omnibus to carry them about. “jo, dear, what is it? are you crying about father?” “no, not now. you are the one for that. laurie opened his mouth to ask another question, but remembering just in time that it wasn’t manners to make too many inquiries into people’s affairs, he shut it again, and looked uncomfortable. march’s departure. but it did not last long. she seemed to take all the girl’s courage with her, for when left alone, meg stood for a moment, undecided whether to laugh or cry. march. “father, mother, this is my friend, professor bhaer,” she said, with a face and tone of such irrepressible pride and pleasure that she might as well have blown a trumpet and opened the door with a flourish. “i won’t be so silly, or hurt marmee’s feelings, when she took so much pains to get my things. gutenberg. ” “but it’s dull at aunt march’s, and she is so cross,” said amy, looking rather frightened. “you have only to wait, i am to do the work,” said john beginning his labors by picking up meg’s napkin, with an expression which caused jo to shake her head, and then say to herself with an air of relief as the front door banged, “here comes laurie. ” it amused uncle immensely. “bad boy, be quiet! sit down and think of your own sins, don’t go making me add to mine. “wouldn’t i though? i’d have a stable full of arabian steeds, rooms piled high with books, and i’d write out of a magic inkstand, so that my works should be as famous as laurie’s music. make up your mind to that, or i’ll never go,” she added resolutely, as he tried to reclaim his load. they will turn to you, don’t fail them, and if it’s hard to work alone, remember that i don’t forget you, and that you’ll be happier in doing that than writing splendid books or seeing all the world, for love is the only thing that we can carry with us when we go, and it makes the end so easy. ” “that’s like you, dear! what will we get?” exclaimed jo. “mother did it. did john ever neglect you, as you call it, while you made it a point to give him your society of an evening, his only leisure time?” “no, but i can’t do it now, with two babies to tend. and mrs. “it is only another name for trying to be good, and the story may help us, for though we do want to be good, it’s hard work and we forget, and don’t do our best. “now i must go and prepare mr. “well, now, don’t be dismal, there’s a good fellow. i couldn’t help hearing at first, and then i was so angry and ashamed, i didn’t remember that i ought to go away. “what jo would give for a sight of that famous speck!” said amy, feeling in good spirits and anxious to see him so also. ” “it’s all right. “she is lying down on mother’s bed, and feels better. ” “you won’t see me, you’ll be crying so hard that the thick fog round you will obscure the prospect. that accounts, perhaps, for your marrying a good-for-nothing like me. laurence standing before the fire in the great drawing room, but jo’s attention was entirely absorbed by a grand piano, which stood open. brooke. no, i won’t stop. she did take off the papers, but no cloud of ringlets appeared, for the hair came with the papers, and the horrified hairdresser laid a row of little scorched bundles on the bureau before her victim. everyone thought the matter ended and the little cloud blown over, but the mischief was done, for though others forgot it, meg remembered. no coaxing, no sugar, no lullaby, no story, even the light was put out and only the red glow of the fire enlivened the ‘big dark’ which demi regarded with curiosity rather than fear. march decidedly. ” “thank you, sir,” and jo was quite comfortable after that, for it suited her exactly. meg wanted a few curls about her face, and jo undertook to pinch the papered locks with a pair of hot tongs. upon my word, when i see one of those harum-scarum girls, i always want to say with our friend cock robin. “you may be a little older in years, but i’m ever so much older in feeling, teddy. the woman’s face is not good, it’s too beautiful for me to draw, but the baby is done better, and i love it very much. ” “you are not made wise by experience, i hope?” and there was an anxious accent in meg’s voice. but it is, as she presently discovered, for her spirits began to rise, and her table to blossom under her skillful hands, the girls were very kind, and that one little act seemed to have cleared the atmosphere amazingly. you are so kind to us, we feel as if you were our brother and say just what we think. if she only would get quite strong and cheerful again, i shouldn’t have a wish in the world. “i say, jo, that’s rather too much,” he began, just in his old boyish way. miss kate sketched and frank talked to beth, who was making little mats of braided rushes to serve as plates. march paused a minute just there, and after a glance at meg, who was violently poking the fire, looked at his wife with an inquiring lift of the eyebrows, i leave you to imagine. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project gutenberg™ electronic works. ” “she can blow him up as well as shine on him,” laughed laurie. 1. it looks hospitable, and i want the poor child to have a good time after all her trouble,” said mrs. ” jo rescued his babies, and marched up and down, with one on each arm, as if already initiated into the mysteries of babytending, while laurie laughed till the tears ran down his cheeks. excuse the remark, but living among boys, i can’t help using their expressions now and then. beth had disappeared behind jo, and grace was asleep. kneeling at the foot of the tower, he sang a serenade in melting tones. “is it the old pain, my precious?” “no, it’s a new one, but i can bear it,” and beth tried to check her tears. meg obediently following the long grass-blade which her new tutor used to point with, read slowly and timidly, unconsciously making poetry of the hard words by the soft intonation of her musical voice. ” leaving his sentence unfinished, he seized pen and paper and wrote to jo, telling her that he could not settle to anything while there was the least hope of her changing her mind. he is very accurate, and particular about the truth—a good trait, though you call him ‘fussy’. people wouldn’t feel so bad about me if i was sick, and i don’t deserve to have them, but i’d like to be loved and missed by a great many friends, so i’m going to try and be like beth all i can. “‘mrs. you’re a regular shakespeare!” exclaimed beth, who firmly believed that her sisters were gifted with wonderful genius in all things. if he had any sorrow, ‘it sat with its head under its wing’, and he turned only his sunny side to the world. ” and he put out his hand for her sketchbook. ” “wait and see if it doesn’t bring you something worth having,” replied the boy, laughing at the thought of a charming little secret which he fancied he knew. her bonnet wasn’t big enough to hide her face, and she feared he might think the joy it betrayed unmaidenly. many nations are represented, many languages spoken, many costumes worn, and on a sunny day the spectacle is as gay and brilliant as a carnival. “could you spare me some of your cake? i really need some, i have so much company, and i can’t make such delicious stuff as yours,” asked meg soberly. let’s send him about his business, and not tell meg a word of it, but all be happy together as we always have been. mr. the fires seemed to burn with unusual cheeriness, and every time the girls met, their pale faces broke into smiles as they hugged one another, whispering encouragingly, “mother’s coming, dear! mother’s coming!” every one rejoiced but beth. ” “i don’t see how. mr. gardiner, a stately old lady, greeted them kindly and handed them over to the eldest of her six daughters. ” “how stupid you are, child! he meant you, of course. when they got into the hall, jo asked laurie if she had said something amiss. “where did you learn all this sort of thing?” he asked with a quizzical look. i read my little book, felt better, resolved not to let the sun set on my anger, and ran over to tell laurie i was sorry. the hard, bitter feeling was getting pretty bad, when the maid brought in a box of flowers. and anxious thoughts may be swept away, as we bravely wield a broom. the idea of having ‘plans’ and being kind to laurie because he’s rich and may marry us by-and-by! won’t he shout when i tell him what those silly things say about us poor children?” and jo laughed, as if on second thoughts the thing struck her as a good joke. “is that all?” “not quite,” stammered amy. “has anybody got anything to tell? it’s been such a dismal day i’m really dying for some amusement,” said meg, as they sat sewing together that evening. no, don’t cry, but hear what a jolly plan i’ve got. ” “isn’t ‘thou’ a little sentimental?” asked jo, privately thinking it a lovely monosyllable. march, smelling the half-dead posy in her belt. can you forgif that, and be happy while we hope and wait?” “yes, i know i can, for we love one another, and that makes all the rest easy to bear. is the point of my mantle in the middle, and have i looped my dress evenly? i like to show my boots, for my feet are pretty, though my nose isn’t. in the ruffled mane, the rider’s breezy hair and erect attitude, there was a suggestion of suddenly arrested motion, of strength, courage, and youthful buoyancy that contrasted sharply with the supine grace of the ‘_dolce far niente_’ sketch. mr. and i’m never to be bothered about money or business, but just enjoy myself and live for what i like. you were whispering and laughing together on the sofa last night, and you stopped when i came in. “just as you please. it’s very pretty—new thing, isn’t it?” “it’s as old as the hills. a very merry lunch it was, for everything seemed fresh and funny, and frequent peals of laughter startled a venerable horse who fed near by. jo’s ambition was to do something very splendid. “really, girls, you are both to be blamed,” said meg, beginning to lecture in her elder-sisterly fashion. i’m sober and sensible enough for anyone’s confidante now. i’ve given ’em the latest yankee shine. the sun was low, and the heavens glowed with the splendor of an autumn sunset. i’ve seen it for some weeks, but have not spoken, feeling sure it would come right in time. “i like that about the splendid picture,” was amy’s approving remark, as jo paused. ” “it’s a mercy you didn’t, mother!” laughed jo, looking at her boots. i hate tea and silk and spices, and every sort of rubbish his old ships bring, and i don’t care how soon they go to the bottom when i own them. it was laurie’s father, who had run away in his youth, and married against the imperious old man’s will. a. he pulled her hair whenever she came near him, upset his bread and milk to plague her when she had newly cleaned his cage, made mop bark by pecking at him while madam dozed, called her names before company, and behaved in all respects like an reprehensible old bird. on going up to put away her best hat, jo’s first look was toward the bureau, for in their last quarrel amy had soothed her feelings by turning jo’s top drawer upside down on the floor. one of us _must_ marry well. ” “now tell me all about yourself. also in return for his great kindness in the hour of affliction any one of my artistic works he likes, noter dame is the best. everything about her mutely suggested love and sorrow, the blotted letters in her lap, the black ribbon that tied up her hair, the womanly pain and patience in her face, even the little ebony cross at her throat seemed pathetic to laurie, for he had given it to her, and she wore it as her only ornament. jo started up, revived the blaze, and crept to the bedside, hoping beth slept. “i’ve loved you ever since i’ve known you, jo, couldn’t help it, you’ve been so good to me. “why not?” in an anxious tone. laurie has confessed, asked pardon, and been punished quite enough. ” “you know us,” began jo, then laughed and stopped. to jo’s lively fancy, this fine house seemed a kind of enchanted palace, full of splendors and delights which no one enjoyed. “truly, marmar?” asks demi, with a brilliant idea in his well-powdered head. “i am sure of that. “i always do take a walk toward evening, and i don’t know why i should give it up, just because i happen to meet the professor on his way out,” said jo to herself, after two or three encounters, for though there were two paths to meg’s whichever one she took she was sure to meet him, either going or returning. we won’t talk about it now, for it makes me cry, and i want to enjoy you while you stay. i picked up a few bits of news and was introduced to the professor. ” poor laurie didn’t know where to look, for, man though he was, something of the old bashfulness came over him as this burst of praise made all faces turn approvingly upon him. i haven’t flirted, mother, truly, but remembered what you said to me, and have done my very best. amy liked the idea, and gave her leave to arrange the light closet next her room, hoping it would do her good. ” “so she is. aunt looked sober at first, but he was so cool about it she couldn’t say a word. what were you doing, sir, up in that billiard saloon?” “begging your pardon, ma’am, it wasn’t a billiard saloon, but a gymnasium, and i was taking a lesson in fencing. “not very well. the letter went very soon, however, and was promptly answered, for amy was homesick, and confessed it in the most delightfully confiding manner. “did you go to paris?” “we spent last winter there. “nearer my sister jo’s; i am seventeen in august,” returned meg, tossing her head. “very soon. next morning, instead of the usual call, amy received a note which made her smile at the beginning and sigh at the end. i’ve seen many girls do it so,” said amy consolingly. “don’t mind me. i don’t want any secrets, and it’s kinder to prepare them. one night when beth looked among the books upon her table, to find something to make her forget the mortal weariness that was almost as hard to bear as pain, as she turned the leaves of her old favorite, pilgrims’s progress, she found a little paper, scribbled over in jo’s hand. her stealthy paws tread the very hall where snowball used to play, but she only spits at the dogs our pet so gallantly drove away. ” beth had her troubles as well as the others, and not being an angel but a very human little girl, she often ‘wept a little weep’ as jo said, because she couldn’t take music lessons and have a fine piano. international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the united states. not one whole or handsome one among them, all were outcasts till beth took them in, for when her sisters outgrew these idols, they passed to her because amy would have nothing old or ugly. other models failing her for a time, she undertook to cast her own pretty foot, and the family were one day alarmed by an unearthly bumping and screaming and running to the rescue, found the young enthusiast hopping wildly about the shed with her foot held fast in a pan full of plaster, which had hardened with unexpected rapidity. she did surprise two of them so much that meg started as if she had seen a ghost, and mr. ” “i haven’t got any,” began jo, but stopped suddenly, remembering that she had. ” “i can’t argue about it, i only know that it’s the way of the world, and people who set themselves against it only get laughed at for their pains. hang college!” muttered laurie with an impatient sigh. “oh, bless you, no! but she let old belsham rest, and when i ran back after my gloves this afternoon, there she was, so hard at the vicar that she didn’t hear me laugh as i danced a jig in the hall because of the good time coming. but beth’s roses are sweeter to me,” said mrs. roderigo rent his chains asunder manfully, and hugo died in agonies of remorse and arsenic, with a wild, “ha! ha!” “it’s the best we’ve had yet,” said meg, as the dead villain sat up and rubbed his elbows. she was going early, so she bade them all goodbye overnight, and when his turn came, she said warmly, “now, sir, you won’t forget to come and see us, if you ever travel our way, will you? i’ll never forgive you if you do, for i want them all to know my friend. don’t expect anything from me when you are married. ” “by my faith, i envy him. “mother didn’t say anything about our money, and she won’t wish us to give up everything. it happened to be a hired waiter who knew nothing about the neighborhood and jo was looking round for help when laurie, who had heard what she said, came up and offered his grandfather’s carriage, which had just come for him, he said. mr. upon my word, i was so tumbled up in my mind, at one time, that i didn’t know which i loved best, you or amy, and tried to love you both alike. ” “that looks feasible. the room was very still, when the clear voice failed suddenly at the last line of beth’s favorite hymn. and no one seemed to have the slightest suspicion that professor bhaer, while talking philosophy with the father, was giving the daughter lessons in love. ” as jo waved her hands and gave a sigh of rapture, the family went off into a gale of merriment, and mr. it came to her then more bitterly than ever that beth was slowly drifting away from her, and her arms instinctively tightened their hold upon the dearest treasure she possessed. they are not for children to see, nor young people to read. “daisy march—father a colonel in the army—one of our first families, but reverses of fortune, you know; intimate friends of the laurences; sweet creature, i assure you; my ned is quite wild about her. “do you play?” she asked, turning to laurie with a respectful expression. but at the last minute, mrs. ” “i can’t help it. it had been successful, for at three-and-twenty, blighted affections find a balm in friendly society, and young nerves will thrill, young blood dance, and healthy young spirits rise, when subjected to the enchantment of beauty, light, music, and motion. beth is going to be with me a great deal, and the other girls will drop in now and then to laugh at my housekeeping struggles. “most observing bird,” said the old lady. her real name was estelle, but aunt march ordered her to change it, and she obeyed, on condition that she was never asked to change her religion. everything was good, well made, and little worn, but amy’s artistic eyes were much afflicted, especially this winter, when her school dress was a dull purple with yellow dots and no trimming. “mother, did you go away and let everything be, just to see how we’d get on?” cried meg, who had had suspicions all day. she and amy had had many lively skirmishes in the course of their lives, for both had quick tempers and were apt to be violent when fairly roused. never mind, i can walk. e. so out came the tarlatan, looking older, limper, and shabbier than ever beside sallie’s crisp new one. ” after a minute’s silence, he looked down at amy, who sat on the cricket at his feet, and said, with a caress of the shining hair. feeling that she had not mended matters much, amy took the offered third of a seat, shook her hair over her face, and accepted an oar. ” “and i drink ‘long life to your resolution’, teddy,” cried jo, baptizing him with a splash of lemonade, as she waved her glass and beamed approvingly upon him. “no, he won’t, he’s so tired he will soon drop off and then the matter is settled, for he will understand that he has got to mind. “send a telegram saying i will come at once. “jo wanted me to come, and tell her how you looked, so i did,” answered laurie, without turning his eyes upon her, though he half smiled at her maternal tone. “here’s richness!” cried jo, flying in to tell the news to meg. the land literally flowed with milk and honey on such occasions, for the lads were not required to sit at table, but allowed to partake of refreshment as they liked—freedom being the sauce best beloved by the boyish soul. by the time the lecture ended and the audience awoke, she had built up a splendid fortune for herself (not the first founded on paper), and was already deep in the concoction of her story, being unable to decide whether the duel should come before the elopement or after the murder. day and night she brooded over them with tireless devotion and anxiety, leaving john to the tender mercies of the help, for an irish lady now presided over the kitchen department. march, well pleased at laurie’s decision and the energy with which he spoke. “who did it?” demanded jo. “me likes to be sick. the poor things got no other lunch and were seldom home before two. ” ah, jo, instead of wishing that, thank god that ‘father and mother were particular’, and pity from your heart those who have no such guardians to hedge them round with principles which may seem like prison walls to impatient youth, but which will prove sure foundations to build character upon in womanhood. “if mother would only come now!” said jo, as the winter night began to wane. meg is a great comfort to me and lets me have jelly every night at tea its so good for me jo says because it keeps me sweet tempered. toodles’. with the good sense and sturdy independence that characterized him, he refused mr. i didn’t think that of you. “it’s like grandpa to find out all about him without letting him know, and to tell all his goodness to others, so that they might like him. he was in one of his moods, for the day had been both unprofitable and unsatisfactory, and he was wishing he could live it over again. my girls, will you give them your breakfast as a christmas present?” they were all unusually hungry, having waited nearly an hour, and for a minute no one spoke, only a minute, for jo exclaimed impetuously, “i’m so glad you came before we began!” “may i go and help carry the things to the poor little children?” asked beth eagerly. goodness knows i need a little change, for elegance has a bad effect upon my constitution,” returned jo gruffly, being disturbed by her failure to suit. it will be good for my vanity, i was getting too proud of my wig. they had been talking of bonnivard, as they glided past chillon, and of rousseau, as they looked up at clarens, where he wrote his heloise. amy did not come, meg went to her room to try on a new dress, jo was absorbed in her story, and hannah was sound asleep before the kitchen fire, when beth quietly put on her hood, filled her basket with odds and ends for the poor children, and went out into the chilly air with a heavy head and a grieved look in her patient eyes. now do be still, and stop bothering. well, last evening we went up to the castle about sunset, at least all of us but fred, who was to meet us there after going to the post restante for letters. the feeble fingers were never idle, and one of her pleasures was to make little things for the school children daily passing to and fro, to drop a pair of mittens from her window for a pair of purple hands, a needlebook for some small mother of many dolls, penwipers for young penmen toiling through forests of pothooks, scrapbooks for picture-loving eyes, and all manner of pleasant devices, till the reluctant climbers of the ladder of learning found their way strewn with flowers, as it were, and came to regard the gentle giver as a sort of fairy godmother, who sat above there, and showered down gifts miraculously suited to their tastes and needs. “i don’t see anything funny,” she said gravely, when she could be heard. jo was dismissed, but chose to march up and down the hall like a sentinel, having some fear that the prisoner might bolt. the vacation is nearly over, the stints are all done, and we are ever so glad that we didn’t dawdle. stoop down, and let me take the crumbs off of your bonnet. for this i should be grateful, should i not?” “indeed you should. seeing a ray of hope in that last speech, laurie threw himself down on the grass at her feet, leaned his arm on the lower step of the stile, and looked up at her with an expectant face. “i always call you so to myself—i forgot, but i won’t unless you like it. ” “poor girls don’t stand any chance, belle says, unless they put themselves forward,” sighed meg. “how do you know? did mother tell you?” asked jo. “it’s just what you need to bring out the tender womanly half of your nature, jo. “you must never say that to papa. an artist friend fitted her out with his castoff palettes, brushes, and colors, and she daubed away, producing pastoral and marine views such as were never seen on land or sea. laurie saw and understood the affectionate anxiety which she hesitated to express, and looking straight into her eyes, said, just as he used to say it to her mother, “it’s all right, ma’am. greatheart’ on the spot. ” this was a surprise even to the actors, and when they saw the table, they looked at one another in rapturous amazement. i like him, and we get on comfortably together. ” “it won’t fail. “i’m afraid it’s partly your own fault, dear. the last name was written in pencil, and amy explained that he was to rewrite it in ink and seal it up for her properly. “we wanted to surprise you. this tastes right. it is good practice for me, and with my sketchbook will give you a better idea of my tour than these scribbles. he has been so kind and jolly that we all got quite fond of him. ” “i thought you’d find it so. “one person begins a story, any nonsense you like, and tells as long as he pleases, only taking care to stop short at some exciting point, when the next takes it up and does the same. “i didn’t say anything about his eyes, and i don’t see why you need fire up when i admire his riding. “it’s a pity laurie isn’t here to help us,” began jo, as they sat down to ice cream and salad for the second time in two days. didn’t they steal sips of tea, stuff gingerbread ad libitum, get a hot biscuit apiece, and as a crowning trespass, didn’t they each whisk a captivating little tart into their tiny pockets, there to stick and crumble treacherously, teaching them that both human nature and a pastry are frail? burdened with the guilty consciousness of the sequestered tarts, and fearing that dodo’s sharp eyes would pierce the thin disguise of cambric and merino which hid their booty, the little sinners attached themselves to ‘dranpa’, who hadn’t his spectacles on. the boyish abandon of that stout man was charming to behold, for though he ‘carried weight’, he danced like an india-rubber ball. to hannah i give the bandbox she wanted and all the patchwork i leave hoping she ‘will remember me, when it you see’. “yes, i hoped it would be so, ever since amy wrote that she had refused fred. my child, the troubles and temptations of your life are beginning and may be many, but you can overcome and outlive them all if you learn to feel the strength and tenderness of your heavenly father as you do that of your earthly one. “oh my teddy! oh my teddy!” “dear jo, you are glad to see me, then?” “glad! my blessed boy, words can’t express my gladness. my faith! wasn’t it love among the roses!” laurie seemed to forget jo for a minute, and jo was glad of it, for the fact that he told her these things so freely and so naturally assured her that he had quite forgiven and forgotten. may i have the honor?” “i can give you one if i put off the count. “i wish i was going to have a fine time and wear all these nice things,” said amy with her mouth full of pins, as she artistically replenished her sister’s cushion. ” said meg. amy’s chief delight was an indian cabinet, full of queer drawers, little pigeonholes, and secret places, in which were kept all sorts of ornaments, some precious, some merely curious, all more or less antique. the next train goes early in the morning. jo was in her element that day, and rushed about, with her gown pinned up, and her hat anywhere but on her head, and her baby tucked under her arm, ready for any lively adventure which might turn up. if you had just reversed the nod and the bow, it would have been right,” said amy reprovingly. she heard of a young horse at the farm house over the river, and though a lady had never ridden him, she resolved to try, because he was handsome and spirited. some are naughty through mismanagment or neglect, and some lose their mothers. you have rather cast me off lately, jo, but i’ve had the best of help, nevertheless. i’m sick of the sight of this, and there’s no reason you should all die of a surfeit because i’ve been a fool,” cried amy, wiping her eyes. my hair!” burst out poor jo, trying vainly to smother her emotion in the pillow. we don’t keep silence to shield him, but someone else, and it will make more trouble if you interfere. it cost her a pang even to think of giving up the little treasures which in her eyes were as precious as the old lady’s jewels. the latest paris fashions have arrived, and orders are respectfully solicited. he was a homely man, but they thought his face quite heavenly when he smiled and said, with a fatherly look at them, “yes, my dears, i think the little girl will pull through this time. those foolish, yet well meant words, had opened a new world to meg, and much disturbed the peace of the old one in which till now she had lived as happily as a child. kirke wrote to you for some respectable young person to teach her children and sew. mr. “grandfather and napoleon. “that looks too pretty to eat,” he said, smiling with pleasure, as jo uncovered the dish, and showed the blanc mange, surrounded by a garland of green leaves, and the scarlet flowers of amy’s pet geranium. laurie resigned her to the ‘nice little boy’, and went to do his duty to flo, without securing amy for the joys to come, which reprehensible want of forethought was properly punished, for she immediately engaged herself till supper, meaning to relent if he then gave any signs penitence. brooke came home’. march, laughing inaudibly at the recollection of jo’s dinner party, for she had met miss crocker and heard her account of it. “no, it’s the toasting fork, with mother’s shoe on it instead of the bread. if my memory serves me, you once thought it your duty to make a rich match. now then, meg!” and jo tramped away, feeling that the pilgrims were not setting out as they ought to do. presently jo appeared, proudly bearing a flannel bundle laid forth upon a large pillow. he and jo keep us merry, for we get pretty blue sometimes, and feel like orphans, with you so far away. it won’t do to be dismal now. lamb, but if you should come, i don’t think i shall have the heart to send you away. “if something very pleasant should happen now, we should think it a delightful month,” said beth, who took a hopeful view of everything, even november. your hair is becoming, and it looks very boyish and nice,” returned meg, trying not to smile at the curly head, which looked comically small on her tall sister’s shoulders. ” “he meant the blanc mange, i suppose. beth kept on, with only slight relapses into idleness or grieving. she tried to forget herself, to keep cheerful, and be satisfied with doing right, though no one saw or praised her for it. haf you patience to wait a long time, jo? i must go away and do my work alone. it’s not a fashionable place, but uncle stopped here years ago, and won’t go anywhere else. oh, mother, i never knew how much like heaven this world could be, when two people love and live for one another!” “and that’s our cool, reserved, and worldly amy! truly, love does work miracles. ” “true, nevertheless. the name caught her eye and the blurred look of the lines made her sure that tears had fallen on it. well, she drew a picture of mr. this gaiety did not impose upon anybody, but they tried to look as if it did for his sake, and he got on very well till mrs. ” “i could, if i tried. davis had declared limes a contraband article, and solemnly vowed to publicly ferrule the first person who was found breaking the law. “yankees have a trick of being generous to their enemies,” said jo, with a look that made the lad redden, “especially when they beat them,” she added, as, leaving kate’s ball untouched, she won the game by a clever stroke. “and i got a note from mr. bhaer. it is the shadow of pain which touches the young face with such pathetic patience, but beth seldom complains and always speaks hopefully of ‘being better soon’. where is the use of having a lot of dresses when she isn’t out yet? there’s no need of sending home, daisy, even if you had a dozen, for i’ve got a sweet blue silk laid away, which i’ve outgrown, and you shall wear it to please me, won’t you, dear?” “you are very kind, but i don’t mind my old dress if you don’t, it does well enough for a little girl like me,” said meg. “now, beth,” said amy, longing for her turn, but ready to wait. “’tisn’t in mine head, it’s in mine mouf,” answered literal demi, putting out his tongue, with a chocolate drop on it, thinking she alluded to confectionery, not ideas. ” the word ‘mother’ suggested other maternal counsels given long ago, and received with unbelieving protests. ” “very good! then i am quite satisfied with the experiment, and fancy that we shall not have to repeat it, only don’t go to the other extreme and delve like slaves. brooke’s waistcoat. jo gave a sort of gasp, as if a cold shower bath had suddenly fallen upon her, for such an unexpected turning of the tables actually took her breath away. “oh, she liked it, and she kissed me, and i liked it. “i told my plan to fritz once, and he said it was just what he would like, and agreed to try it when we got rich. “it’s all right, dear, and a very pretty idea, quite sensible too, for no one can ever mistake now. if it had not been for laurie, and old esther, the maid, she felt that she never could have got through that dreadful time. to her great relief and surprise, the old gentleman only threw his spectacles onto the table with a rattle and exclaimed frankly, “you’re right, girl, i am! i love the boy, but he tries my patience past bearing, and i know how it will end, if we go on so. “so do i,” added her husband, who welcomed the thought of a chance for trying the socratic method of education on modern youth. mr. she wondered still more if her sister really guessed the hard truth, and what thoughts were passing through her mind during the long hours when she lay on the warm rocks with her head in jo’s lap, while the winds blew healthfully over her and the sea made music at her feet. but her mother held her back, saying, with a look she seldom wore. march needed rest, and seizing laurie, he precipitately retired. remembering the conversation of the afternoon, the boy said to himself, with the resolve to make the sacrifice cheerfully, “i’ll let my castle go, and stay with the dear old gentleman while he needs me, for i am all he has. moffat would be entirely eclipsed by young mrs. ” “the pretty one is meg, and the curly-haired one is amy, i believe?” “how did you find that out?” laurie colored up, but answered frankly, “why, you see i often hear you calling to one another, and when i’m alone up here, i can’t help looking over at your house, you always seem to be having such good times. they treated her with more respect, she thought, took quite a tender interest in what she said, and looked at her with eyes that plainly betrayed curiosity. do you doubt it, my darling?” amy looked up at him, and was satisfied. like the tower of babel? it is full of unruly members. “more cruel than ever. chapter thirty-nine lazy laurence laurie went to nice intending to stay a week, and remained a month. nobody talked much, but as the time drew very near and they sat waiting for the carriage, mrs. when that is off we shall see how he regards the fair maid whose heart he cannot win, though her stern father bestows her hand,” returned the troubadour. “never mind, i’ll get the dinner and be servant, you be mistress, keep your hands nice, see company, and give orders,” said jo, who knew still less than meg about culinary affairs. it couldn’t be very hard, many people would be proud and glad to have such a dear boy care for them. instant silence fell on the gay throng, and not a sound, but the dash of fountains or the rustle of orange groves sleeping in the moonlight, broke the hush, as count de adelon spoke thus: “my lords and ladies, pardon the ruse by which i have gathered you here to witness the marriage of my daughter. ” mrs. i told mother black with a white handle, but she forgot and bought a green one with a yellowish handle. for, innocent and unsuspicious as she was, she could not help understanding the gossip of her friends. accept it, and the alpine maid, from laurie and from jo. ” “are you going to help about the fair, dear?” asked mrs. kitty and minnie kirke likewise regard him with affection, and tell all sorts of stories about the plays he invents, the presents he brings, and the splendid tales he tells. lends him her parlor for some of his scholars. “it seems as if half the house was gone,” added meg forlornly. laurence. here you have been abroad nearly six months, and done nothing but waste time and money and disappoint your friends. she has had some experience, and got a prize for a tale in the _blarneystone banner_. he did not say to himself, “it is none of my business. it was not, however, and her panic subsided as she remembered that even if it had been and one of her own tales in it, there would have been no name to betray her. i won’t go before seventeen, anyway. i’m sure of that. the busy mind has no time to think of sorrow or care or gloom. “pooh! you’re a girl, and it’s fun, but i’ll allow no man to shake me!” “i don’t think anyone would care to try it, if you looked as much like a thundercloud as you do now. “wait for me, my friend. she had betrayed herself, however, by a look and a blush, for though an absent man, the professor saw a good deal more than people fancied. “i know you did, but the girls are so queer you never know what they mean. but in their kindness meg saw only pity for her poverty, and her heart felt very heavy as she stood by herself, while the others laughed, chattered, and flew about like gauzy butterflies. amy has all the fun and i have all the work. bhaer’s face had lost the absent-minded expression, and looked all alive with interest in the present moment, actually young and handsome, she thought, forgetting to compare him with laurie, as she usually did strange men, to their great detriment. amy’s conscience preached her a little sermon from that text, then and there, and she did what many of us do not always do, took the sermon to heart, and straightway put it in practice. “do you call him ‘john’?” asked meg, smiling, with her innocent eyes looking down into her mother’s. i haven’t got it, don’t know where it is now, and don’t care. if you do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. buffaloes proved soothing and satisfactory, and in her eagerness to amuse another, beth forgot herself, and was quite unconscious of her sisters’ surprise and delight at the unusual spectacle of beth talking away to one of the dreadful boys, against whom she had begged protection. “oh! that does me no end of good. ” “shall i tell you how?” asked mr. i don’t know how, but the book tells. as she passed the art table, she glanced over it for her sister’s things, but saw no sign of them. amy stood a minute, turning the leaves in her hand, reading on each some sweet rebuke for all heartburnings and uncharitableness of spirit. march, as she and her daughter went through the new kingdom arm in arm, for just then they seemed to cling together more tenderly than ever. presently jo said cheerfully, for she didn’t want the coming home to be a sad one, “i can’t make it true that you children are really married and going to set up housekeeping. ” “ah, jo, mothers may differ in their management, but the hope is the same in all—the desire to see their children happy. meg got behind his chair under pretense of smoothing the wrinkles out of his tired forehead, and standing there, she said, with her panic increasing with every word. the happy old times can’t come back, and we mustn’t expect it. one thing remember, my girls. ” “we don’t cheat in america, but you can, if you choose,” said jo angrily. let’s hear the sound of the baby pianny,” said hannah, who always took a share in the family joys and sorrows. she put down her work and got up, thinking, “i will be the first to say, ‘forgive me’”, but he did not seem to hear her. laurie and his grandfather came over to see her off, and mr. ” “thanks, mother, you are always so kind. but, like all happiness, it did not last long, for as sure as she had just reached the heart of the story, the sweetest verse of a song, or the most perilous adventure of her traveler, a shrill voice called, “josy-phine! josy-phine!” and she had to leave her paradise to wind yarn, wash the poodle, or read belsham’s essays by the hour together. march smiled and began at once, for she had told stories to this little audience for many years, and knew how to please them. laurence’s gruff voice sounded gruffer than ever, as jo tapped at his door. however, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website (www. she doesn’t bounce, but moves quietly, and takes care of a certain little person in a motherly way which delights me. my dear creature, she actually rowed it over the river, put it on her head, and marched up to the barn to the utter amazement of the old man!” “did she ride the horse?” “of course she did, and had a capital time. “bless your heart, child, it’s to keep you well. you are a dear to lend me yours, jo. so she dressed herself in her best, and trying to persuade herself that she was neither excited nor nervous, bravely climbed two pairs of dark and dirty stairs to find herself in a disorderly room, a cloud of cigar smoke, and the presence of three gentlemen, sitting with their heels rather higher than their hats, which articles of dress none of them took the trouble to remove on her appearance. any girl reader who has suffered like afflictions will sympathize with poor amy and wish her well through her task. i write that rubbish because it sells, and ordinary people like it. next morning, meg did not appear till ten o’clock. jo saw a big red headed youth approaching her corner, and fearing he meant to engage her, she slipped into a curtained recess, intending to peep and enjoy herself in peace. “miss meg march, one letter and a glove,” continued beth, delivering the articles to her sister, who sat near her mother, stitching wristbands. ” and, to the utter amazement of the assembled family, beth walked deliberately down the garden, through the hedge, and in at the laurences’ door. “did the german song suit, miss march?” inquired mr. this is a ladies’ club, and we wish to be private and proper. “i couldn’t help it, i felt so lonely and sad, and was so very glad to see you. i forgot it, but i want it done though it will spoil my looks. beth clapped her hands, regardless of the biscuit she held, and jo tossed up her napkin, crying, “a letter! a letter! three cheers for father!” “yes, a nice long letter. i used to see father sometimes put his finger on his lips, and look at you with a very kind but sober face, and you always folded your lips tight and went away. little teddy bore a charmed life, for nothing ever happened to him, and jo never felt any anxiety when he was whisked up into a tree by one lad, galloped off on the back of another, or supplied with sour russets by his indulgent papa, who labored under the germanic delusion that babies could digest anything, from pickled cabbage to buttons, nails, and their own small shoes. i keep my diary, and try to ‘remember correctly and describe clearly all that i see and admire’, as father advised. ” “i do, so much. “cuddle your cats and get over your headache, bethy. march said sorrowfully. and when they went away, leaving comfort behind, i think there were not in all the city four merrier people than the hungry little girls who gave away their breakfasts and contented themselves with bread and milk on christmas morning. “i was mortally afraid she’d ask me to go with her. “i’ll learn plain cooking for my holiday task, and the next dinner party i have shall be a success. ” “wouldn’t you have a master for your castle in the air?” asked laurie slyly. to send donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www. there is so much to do about the play for christmas night,” said jo, marching up and down, with her hands behind her back, and her nose in the air. the words, “fred is a good fellow, but not at all the man i fancied you would ever like,” and laurie’s face when he uttered them, kept returning to her as pertinaciously as her own did when she said in look, if not in words, “i shall marry for money. meg looked very like a rose herself, for all that was best and sweetest in heart and soul seemed to bloom into her face that day, making it fair and tender, with a charm more beautiful than beauty. “but mr. ” “yes, you did, it was a bargain between us. “mother and i have talked that over, and i have made up my mind to try her way first. “‘just the thing,’ said the girl, and ran to get twelve fine ones from her garden. meg is happy, brooke will fly round and get settled immediately, grandpa will attend to him, and it will be very jolly to see meg in her own little house. ” but jo got out her desk and began to overhaul her half-finished manuscripts. then they act upon it, and, if it succeeds, they give the weaker vessel half the credit of it. at twenty-five, girls begin to talk about being old maids, but secretly resolve that they never will be. bhaer, with a paternal air. it’s great fun. “i like the diamonds best, but there is no necklace among them, and i’m fond of necklaces, they are so becoming. birds twittered their adieux from the alders in the lane, and every tree stood ready to send down its shower of red or yellow apples at the first shake. in the hope of pleasing everyone, she took everyone’s advice, and like the old man and his donkey in the fable suited nobody. it was a people’s course, the lecture on the pyramids, and jo rather wondered at the choice of such a subject for such an audience, but took it for granted that some great social evil would be remedied or some great want supplied by unfolding the glories of the pharaohs to an audience whose thoughts were busy with the price of coal and flour, and whose lives were spent in trying to solve harder riddles than that of the sphinx. but she made a wry face at the prospect, and scratched away at her palette as if bent on vigorous measures before she gave up her hopes. it’s rather hard to find just the thing, but i think i should suit if i tried. march had had a relapse, and could not think of coming home for a long while. but in spite of their efforts to be as cheery as larks, the flutelike voices did not seem to chord as well as usual, and all felt out of tune. you could make a charming thing of it, and the flower table is always attractive you know. bhaer’s hair stuck straight up all over his head, for he always rumpled it wildly when disturbed in mind. sweets to the sweet, mannling,” and mr. a literary spinster, with a pen for a spouse, a family of stories for children, and twenty years hence a morsel of fame, perhaps, when, like poor johnson, i’m old and can’t enjoy it, solitary, and can’t share it, independent, and don’t need it. i don’t see how he can help it, and i do believe he would if the rest of us were out of the way. mantalini says?” that didn’t sound like john, and she knew he was looking up at her with the straightforward look that she had always been ready to meet and answer with one as frank till now. i’m to carry my share, friedrich, and help to earn the home. “there never was such a cross family!” cried jo, losing her temper when she had upset an inkstand, broken both boot lacings, and sat down upon her hat. bhaer confiscated her purse, produced his own, and finished the marketing by buying several pounds of grapes, a pot of rosy daisies, and a pretty jar of honey, to be regarded in the light of a demijohn. a poor woman came in with a pail and a mop, and asked mr. ” “stay as you are, and go to sleep if you like. “very well, my son, for a small boy!” and walked him off, with a paternal pat on the head. going? well, i’m much obliged to you, and i hope you’ll come again. you are so changed, i sometimes think—” there amy stopped, with a half-timid, half-wistful look, more significant than her unfinished speech. 1. so nothing came of these trials, and jo corked up her inkstand, and said in a fit of very wholesome humility. a chanting cherub adorned the cover of the sugar bucket, and attempts to portray romeo and juliet supplied kindling for some time. what is it?” asked meg. ” “how ridiculous you are, jo!” but meg laughed at the nonsense and felt better in spite of herself. i forgot my bashfulness, and pegged away (no other word will express it) with all my might, tumbling over long words, pronouncing according to inspiration of the minute, and doing my very best. of course, we hope that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. “you’ve a deal more principle and generosity and nobleness of character than i ever gave you credit for, amy. hannah says she thinks so, but she looks worried, and that makes me fidgety,” answered meg. ” s. he sighed, and then said, in a spiritless tone, “just as you like, sir. laurence are friends, you know, so it is quite natural that we children should play together,” and meg hoped they would say no more. “upon my word, here’s a state of things!” cried the old lady, taking the seat of honor prepared for her, and settling the folds of her lavender moire with a great rustle. tea parties didn’t amount to much, neither did picnics, unless very well conducted. we are man and woman now, with sober work to do, for playtime is over, and we must give up frolicking. ” “i’m so glad my french print is clean, it’s just the thing and so becoming!” observed meg complacently. she woke meg with a “merry christmas,” and bade her see what was under her pillow. ” “he expects you, and you really ought to go. “i used to be so frightened when it was my turn to sit in the chair with the crown on, and see you all come marching round to give the presents, with a kiss. as amy returned from her last trip, mr. soon your mother will be here, and then everything will be all right. the things were just what i wanted, and all the better for being made instead of bought. what those two creatures did in her absence, she never knew, but mr. nobody knew what cheered her up after a sober fit, but everyone felt how sweet and helpful beth was, and fell into a way of going to her for comfort or advice in their small affairs. before she could make up her mind, she was taken possession of by mr. i know just what i should say, for i’ve planned it all, so i needn’t be taken unawares. laurie looked at her once or twice, but as she showed no sign of relenting, he felt injured, and turned his back on her till the others were done with him, when he made her a low bow and walked off without a word. ” “play something, amy. come to your tea, sir, and behave like a gentleman. ” jo leaned down to kiss the tranquil face, and with that silent kiss, she dedicated herself soul and body to beth. another cat comes after her mice, a cat with a dirty face, but she does not hunt as our darling did, nor play with her airy grace. “sixteen, next month. “that’s not right, jo. i couldn’t enjoy myself if i neglected them even for you, so there’s no need of hurry or impatience. “you think so now, but there’ll come a time when you will care for somebody, and you’ll love him tremendously, and live and die for him. esther fitted up the closet with a little table, placed a footstool before it, and over it a picture taken from one of the shut-up rooms. “i hate to be patronized, and the chesters think it’s a great favor to allow us to help with their highly connected fair. w. pat paw we mourn the loss of our little pet, and sigh o’er her hapless fate, for never more by the fire she’ll sit, nor play by the old green gate. i wish beth could have come, it would have done her so much good. here an ancient monastery, whence the solemn chanting of the monks came down to them. i’ll go myself,” answered amy, whose temper was beginning to fail. then i bolted, for fear i should forget myself. “i knew a girl once, who had a really remarkable talent for music, and she didn’t know it, never guessed what sweet little things she composed when she was alone, and wouldn’t have believed it if anyone had told her. in a place like this i’m sure to upset something, tread on people’s toes, or do something dreadful, so i keep out of mischief and let meg sail about. a grove of pines covered one part of it, and from the heart of this green spot came a clearer sound than the soft sigh of the pines or the drowsy chirp of the crickets. gutenberg. as if she heard, amy opened her eyes, and held out her arms, with a smile that went straight to jo’s heart. dear soul, i wish she was here to help me!” “so do i!” the hand vanished as suddenly as it came, and there was energy enough in the echo of her wish to suit even amy. “what in the world are you doing here?” she asked, regarding her disheveled sister with well-bred surprise. but i don’t believe that was your only reason for saying ‘i’m glad’ in that decided way, was it now?” “no, i was glad that you were not in the saloon, because i hope you never go to such places. he found it difficult to understand how any girl could help loving laurie, and hoped she would change her mind, but he knew even better than jo that love cannot be forced, so he shook his head sadly and resolved to carry his boy out of harm’s way, for young impetuosity’s parting words to jo disturbed him more than he would confess. and when meg told him to behave himself and go away, he wrung imaginary tears out of his handkerchief, and staggered round the corner as if in utter despair. katy brown invited her to her next party on the spot. laurence will help me to some good place, and then, my sweet girl, you will make me happy. ” “but i think girls ought to show when they disapprove of young men, and how can they do it except by their manners? preaching does not do any good, as i know to my sorrow, since i’ve had teddie to manage. what went on there, meg could not see, but shrieks of laughter were heard, followed by the murmur of voices and a great flapping of newspapers. you’ll come and meet me as usual, girls?” laurie said, as he put the sisters into the carriage after the joys of the day were over. a burnt offering has been made to vanity, this hardened palm has earned something better than blisters, and i’m sure the sewing done by these pricked fingers will last a long time, so much good will went into the stitches. she put them in his buttonhole as a peace offering, and he stood a minute looking down at them with a curious expression, for in the italian part of his nature there was a touch of superstition, and he was just then in that state of half-sweet, half-bitter melancholy, when imaginative young men find significance in trifles and food for romance everywhere. do you remember our castles in the air?” asked amy, smiling as she watched laurie and john playing cricket with the boys. a set of silver filagree was added, bracelets, necklace, brooch, and even earrings, for hortense tied them on with a bit of pink silk which did not show. seeing this did more for jo than the wisest sermons, the saintliest hymns, the most fervent prayers that any voice could utter. i intend to work hard,” said amy in her most energetic tone. “my new fan just matches my flowers, my gloves fit to a charm, and the real lace on aunt’s mouchoir gives an air to my whole dress. i don’t mean to plague you and will bear it like a man, but i do wish it was all settled. “i suppose you are going to college soon? i see you pegging away at your books, no, i mean studying hard. “he put his name down for three dances, and i suppose he’s coming for them. another hour, still no one came, and anxious fears of delay in the storm, or accidents by the way, or, worst of all, a great grief at washington, haunted the girls. ” “would you like to go?” asked amy, thoughtfully patting her nose with her knife. now go and answer your note, and let me finish this splendid story. but i don’t see what you can do, except get a carriage, or stay here all night,” answered jo, softly rubbing the poor ankle as she spoke. ” “you’ll not say anything about it at home, will you?” “not a word. ” “i’ve no objection, if you do something. he didn’t hear me call, nor see me flap my parasol in front, and there we were, quite helpless, rattling away, and whirling around corners at a breakneck pace. it’s going to the church of st. “why don’t you say you’d have a splendid, wise, good husband and some angelic little children? you know your castle wouldn’t be perfect without,” said blunt jo, who had no tender fancies yet, and rather scorned romance, except in books. “i told you they dressed me up, but i didn’t tell you that they powdered and squeezed and frizzled, and made me look like a fashion-plate. don’t think too well of me, either, this is not one of my temptations. bhaer cleared his throat with a gratified “hem!” as he stepped into the corner where jo stood, saying. in her motherly way, “i’m on the drive from morning to night, as you may suppose with such a family, but a great anxiety will be off my mind if i know the children are safe with you. she tried to call laurie, but her voice was gone. “only that there are four of them. it was good to see laurie square his shoulders, and smile with masculine scorn at that insinuation, as he replied, with his “high and mighty” air, “amy is too well-bred for that, and i am not the sort of man to submit to it. ” “all may not be bad, only silly, you know, and if there is a demand for it, i don’t see any harm in supplying it. when the sun peeped into the girls’ room early next morning to promise them a fine day, he saw a comical sight. it will be too absurd to put a luncheon for twelve before a single girl,” cried jo, hurrying away to the lower regions, too excited to stop even for a laugh. i’m afraid not, for i didn’t have any heart just then. “i’ve thought a great deal lately about my ‘bundle of naughties’, and being selfish is the largest one in it, so i’m going to try hard to cure it, if i can. ” “i think they would,” came from under the hat, in a grim tone, quite as touching as a broken one. how proud mrs. my father, who taught me, is away, and i don’t get on very fast alone, for i’ve no one to correct my pronunciation. ” “thank you, ma’am,” said a gruff voice behind her, and there, to her great dismay, stood old mr. as he glanced from jo to several other young people, attracted by the brilliancy of the philosophic pyrotechnics, he knit his brows and longed to speak, fearing that some inflammable young soul would be led astray by the rockets, to find when the display was over that they had only an empty stick or a scorched hand. march put by the last finished job, and said, “come girls. thus, we do not necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition. ” “now, teddy, be sensible. mrs. i have my duty, also, and my work. ” the last words were in answer to the look the elder lady gave him, a kindly questioning look which the handsome eyes met so frankly that the little ceremony closed, as usual, with a motherly kiss. he has friends there and finds plenty to amuse him, so i go and come, and we get on capitally. laurie was growing more serious, strong, and firm, and both were learning that beauty, youth, good fortune, even love itself, cannot keep care and pain, loss and sorrow, from the most blessed for. “how nice! but i wish she’d let us have them now. i’ll wait until i do before i try again, and meantime, ‘sweep mud in the street’ if i can’t do better, that’s honest, at least. then they both stopped rowing, and unconsciously added a pretty little tableau of human love and happiness to the dissolving views reflected in the lake. the ugly duckling turned out a swan, you know. “i just wish i had a little of the money laurie spends on that horse,” she added, as if to herself, yet hoping her sisters would hear. he isn’t as handsome as my grandfather, but i like him. there was a dentist’s sign, among others, which adorned the entrance, and after staring a moment at the pair of artificial jaws which slowly opened and shut to draw attention to a fine set of teeth, the young gentleman put on his coat, took his hat, and went down to post himself in the opposite doorway, saying with a smile and a shiver, “it’s like her to come alone, but if she has a bad time she’ll need someone to help her home. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. will you call for the money, or shall i send it?” asked mr. ” “i’m not tired, but you may take an oar, if you like. he’s almost forty, so it’s no harm, marmee. laurence was in the fish shop, but he didn’t see me, for i kept behind the fish barrel, and he was busy with mr. lotty reported that they had eaten “a much, and greatly laughed, and the master bid her throw away all the sweet stuff, and hide the pots. “you’d better read it aloud. at last he resolved to get into the castle and ask how he could help them. with a half-repentant, half-amused expression, laurie gathered up all jo’s letters, smoothed, folded, and put them neatly into a small drawer of the desk, stood a minute turning the ring thoughtfully on his finger, then slowly drew it off, laid it with the letters, locked the drawer, and went out to hear high mass at saint stefan’s, feeling as if there had been a funeral, and though not overwhelmed with affliction, this seemed a more proper way to spend the rest of the day than in writing letters to charming young ladies. i won’t see him, and you two can laugh at me and my jelly as much as you like. i shall certainly laugh if you do. don’t try to make me grow up before my time, meg. i shall come and see your mother some fine day. taking advantage of the propitious moment, meg slipped away and ran down to greet her husband with a smiling face and the little blue bow in her hair which was his especial admiration. she never suspected that the exercise books and new songs which she found in the rack were put there for her especial benefit, and when he talked to her about music at home, she only thought how kind he was to tell things that helped her so much. go on with your work as usual, for work is a blessed solace. ” and meg took a refreshing peep at her glove box. ” “hear! hear!” cried jo, clashing the lid of the warming pan like a cymbal. “yes, he often does, to all of us, for their house is full, and we are so fond of them. “you don’t look a bit like yourself, but you are very nice. she valued his esteem, she coveted his respect, she wanted to be worthy of his friendship, and just when the wish was sincerest, she came near to losing everything. bhaer caught sight of a picture on the hat, and unfolding it, said with great disgust, “i wish these papers did not come in the house. “what made you stay away so long?” she asked presently, finding it so pleasant to ask confidential questions and get delightful answers that she could not keep silent. i only came here because i don’t know many people and felt rather strange at first, you know. why mr. “laurie and his grandfather would care a great deal, and we should all be very sorry to have any harm happen to you,” said meg heartily. “is mr. it’s highly virtuous to say we’ll be good, but we can’t do it all at once, and it takes a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all together before some of us even get our feet set in the right way. aunt march saw that she had begun wrong, and after a little pause, made a fresh start, saying as mildly as she could, “now, meg, my dear, be reasonable and take my advice. “we’ll take this (editors never say i), if you don’t object to a few alterations. “the doctor to see you, sir,” and the maid beckoned as she spoke. “what is it?” cried jo, forgetting her woes for a minute in her wonder. ” neither spoke for several minutes. “iss!” said demi the perjured, blissfully sucking his sugar, and regarding his first attempt as eminently successful. davis had evidently taken his coffee too strong that morning, there was an east wind, which always affected his neuralgia, and his pupils had not done him the credit which he felt he deserved. ” “i’ll do my best, for your sake,” promised beth, wondering why jo looked at her so queerly. the lobster was a scarlet mystery to her, but she hammered and poked till it was unshelled and its meager proportions concealed in a grove of lettuce leaves. ” as she spoke, jo bent over the leaves to hide the trembling of her lips, for lately she had felt that margaret was fast getting to be a woman, and laurie’s secret made her dread the separation which must surely come some time and now seemed very near. “what fun! who are they from? didn’t know you had a lover,” cried the girls, fluttering about meg in a high state of curiosity and surprise. ” “and i’ve got a tremendous will, have i?” “i only said i thought so. bon voyage, mademoiselle. laurence for a couple of bottles of old wine. this belief strengthened daily. ” so meg went away to ‘accept with thanks’, look over her dress, and sing blithely as she did up her one real lace frill, while jo finished her story, her four apples, and had a game of romps with scrabble. “oh, meg, you didn’t answer it?” cried mrs. i am often with him, and he enjoys my adventures, while i like to feel that someone is glad to see me when i get back from my wanderings. “it isn’t anything, only they all felt kindly and wanted to show it. “much obliged. it was like marmee to get up a little treat for them, but anything so fine as this was unheard of since the departed days of plenty. “such a lecture as i got at nice! i give you my word it was a deal worse than any of your scoldings, a regular rouser. the maiden lady is a miss norton, rich, cultivated, and kind. you must get well. the childless old lady had offered to adopt one of the girls when the troubles came, and was much offended because her offer was declined. the invigorating air did them both good, and much exercise worked wholesome changes in minds as well as bodies. it isn’t funny, like jo’s story, but i thought about it a good deal as i came home. demi’s miracle of mechanical skill, though the cover wouldn’t shut, rob’s footstool had a wiggle in its uneven legs that she declared was soothing, and no page of the costly book amy’s child gave her was so fair as that on which appeared in tipsy capitals, the words—“to dear grandma, from her little beth. in a few minutes it really did seem as if kind spirits had been at work there. ” and jo made for the door again. it makes me cross, and my hands get so stiff, i can’t practice well at all. ” when they had laughed at beth’s story, they asked their mother for one, and after a moments thought, she said soberly, “as i sat cutting out blue flannel jackets today at the rooms, i felt very anxious about father, and thought how lonely and helpless we should be, if anything happened to him. ” “don’t you like it?” “of course i don’t. “good for you, jo! did you do it on your own responsibility?” asked laurie, as he seated her in the hall chair and took off the rebellious boots, seeing how her hands shook. tarlatan and tulle were cheap at nice, so she enveloped herself in them on such occasions, and following the sensible english fashion of simple dress for young girls, got up charming little toilettes with fresh flowers, a few trinkets, and all manner of dainty devices, which were both inexpensive and effective. federal laws and your state’s laws. she lay in that heavy stupor, alike unconscious of hope and joy, doubt and danger. a. “i guess not. father’s best books found their way there, mother’s easy chair, jo’s desk, amy’s finest sketches, and every day meg brought her babies on a loving pilgrimage, to make sunshine for aunty beth. but we are all so fond and proud of you, i couldn’t bear to think they should be disappointed in you at home as i have been, though, perhaps they would understand the change better than i do. once i was wicked enough to stop in a thrilling place, and say meekly, ‘i’m afraid it tires you, ma’am. show me how, i’ll do anything you say. what’s yours, meg?” margaret seemed to find it a little hard to tell hers, and waved a brake before her face, as if to disperse imaginary gnats, while she said slowly, “i should like a lovely house, full of all sorts of luxurious things—nice food, pretty clothes, handsome furniture, pleasant people, and heaps of money. i know he has been in mischief by the way he acted when he came home. pickwick why is the p. so a tray was fitted out before anyone began, and taken up with the cook’s compliments. “curly black hair, brown skin, big black eyes, handsome nose, fine teeth, small hands and feet, taller than i am, very polite, for a boy, and altogether jolly. it died in my lap before she got home,” cried beth with a sob. we don’t agree and we never shall, so we’ll be good friends all our lives, but we won’t go and do anything rash. she meant ‘facinating’, but as grace didn’t know the exact meaning of either word, fastidious sounded well and made a good impression. boys go nutting, and i don’t care to be bagged by them,” returned jo, pasting away at the kite which no wind that blows would ever carry up, for daisy had tied herself on as a bob. i dare say i can’t get one at all, for most people come in their own, and it’s a long way to the stable, and no one to send. truth isn’t a bad game,” said fred. “you’d better do it, mary. ” “i am willing to work. she listened to college stories with deep interest, caressed pointers and poodles without a murmur, agreed heartily that “tom brown was a brick,” regardless of the improper form of praise, and when one lad proposed a visit to his turtle tank, she went with an alacrity which caused mamma to smile upon her, as that motherly lady settled the cap which was left in a ruinous condition by filial hugs, bearlike but affectionate, and dearer to her than the most faultless coiffure from the hands of an inspired frenchwoman. brooke looked so strong and sensible and kind that the girls christened him ‘mr. carrol saw the girl’s altered face, she was illuminated with a new idea, and exclaimed to herself, “now i understand it all—the child has been pining for young laurence. “mother and i are going to wait for john. march, sitting down by meg, yet keeping hold of jo, lest she should fly off. ” “poor jo! we left you to bear it alone, while we went pleasuring. “a pair of silk stockings, that pretty carved fan, and a lovely blue sash. “mademoiselle is charmante, tres jolie, is she not?” cried hortense, clasping her hands in an affected rapture. mr. i could not refuse, and so you have a little feast at night to make up for the bread-and-milk breakfast. the duke of devonshire lives near. so, with spartan firmness, the young authoress laid her first-born on her table, and chopped it up as ruthlessly as any ogre. ” “we were in the slough of despond tonight, and mother came and pulled us out as help did in the book. she tried to draw away her hand, but as if he guessed the thought that prompted the half-involuntary impulse, laurie held it fast, and said, with a manly gravity she had never seen in him before. we are too partial, but the praise and blame of outsiders will prove useful, even if she gets but little money. how do you like it?” she thought it would annoy him, but he only folded his arms under his head, with an imperturbable, “that’s not bad. but john shook his head, and said to meg. it might be unmanly, but he couldn’t help it, and i am glad of it. she is conscientious, and i have no fear of her treating him unkindly. this phantom wore many faces, but it always had golden hair, was enveloped in a diaphanous cloud, and floated airily before his mind’s eye in a pleasing chaos of roses, peacocks, white ponies, and blue ribbons. of course, he smiled darkly at their delusion, but passed it by with the sad superiority of one who knew that his fidelity like his love was unalterable. didn’t use so much soap on his hands, he wouldn’t always be late at breakfast. she knew her husband’s income, and she loved to feel that he trusted her, not only with his happiness, but what some men seem to value more—his money. “what do you hate most?” asked fred. always mature for her age, she had gained a certain aplomb in both carriage and conversation, which made her seem more of a woman of the world than she was, but her old petulance now and then showed itself, her strong will still held its own, and her native frankness was unspoiled by foreign polish. ” “i’m glad of it, that’s one of your foolish extravagances, sending flowers and things to girls for whom you don’t care two pins,” continued jo reprovingly. there was no one to bring the horse to the saddle, so she took the saddle to the horse. but grandpa wanted to come home. ” “my first name is theodore, but i don’t like it, for the fellows called me dora, so i made them say laurie instead. it’s my doom, and i can’t help it. “i don’t think i ever ought to call myself ‘unlucky jo’ again, when my greatest wish has been so beautifully gratified,” said mrs. so situated, she was powerless to check jo, who seemed possessed by a spirit of mischief, and talked away as volubly as the lady. chapter twenty-two pleasant meadows like sunshine after a storm were the peaceful weeks which followed. she put it as a favor, but i’m sure mrs. “i’ll wait, and in the meantime, you could be learning to like me. ” demi felt his back, as if expecting to find it like that of the watch, and then gravely remarked, “i dess dod does it when i’s asleep. “tell me about ellen tree. these turnovers were an institution, and the girls called them ‘muffs’, for they had no others and found the hot pies very comforting to their hands on cold mornings. “take lessons of amy, she has a regular talent for it. “i want to ask a favor of you, mamma,” amy said, coming in with an important air one day. “then i’ll enjoy myself. but buds will be roses, and kittens cats, more’s the pity!” “what’s that about flatirons and cats?” asked meg, as she crept into the room with the finished letter in her hand. i feel restless and anxious to be seeing, doing, and learning more than i am. all of a sudden she stopped, caught up the two notes, and after looking at them closely, said decidedly, “i don’t believe brooke ever saw either of these letters. laurie went on the box so meg could keep her foot up, and the girls talked over their party in freedom. what a strange yet pleasant day that was. my sister and friends have just come home, and we are all very happy. she felt as if she had solid ground under her feet again, and when mr. “race down this hill with me, and you’ll be all right,” suggested laurie. ” and, touching her hat a la laurie, away went jo, feeling like a shorn sheep on a wintry day. how is the poor woman?” “doing nicely, sir. ” being sure that no one could do it so well as herself, she went straight to mr. ” “let’s try it,” said jo, who liked new experiments. that will be better than fussing over my own things, which are plenty nice enough as they are. it was only half a dozen little fairy tales, but jo had worked over them patiently, putting her whole heart into her work, hoping to make something good enough to print. “why, you see, he hates to travel, and i hate to keep still, so we each suit ourselves, and there is no trouble. ” began jo, finding it a great deal harder than she expected. he helped and comforted me, and showed me that i must try to practice all the virtues i would have my little girls possess, for i was their example. before mrs. pile our things on her, while i get off these confounded skates,” cried laurie, wrapping his coat round amy, and tugging away at the straps which never seemed so intricate before. scott strolled after him, with a queer look on his face. “no, my boy. ” “not from you, it doesn’t sound natural, and i like your old bluntness better. still another was given her, and she took it, not as a reward, but as a comfort, as christian took the refreshment afforded by the little arbor where he rested, as he climbed the hill called difficulty. “she’s proud, but i don’t believe she’d mind, for that dowdy tarlaton is all she has got. i came to make it up, and can’t go away till i have. ” “i thought it was almost well. she heard mrs. the chicken was tough, the tongue too salty, and the chocolate wouldn’t froth properly. come, demi,” and meg led her son away, feeling a strong desire to spank the little marplot who hopped beside her, laboring under the delusion that the bribe was to be administered as soon as they reached the nursery. 1. everyone scattered like leaves before a gust of wind, and the quiet, happy household was broken up as suddenly as if the paper had been an evil spell. here the clock struck twelve, and both forgot themselves in watching beth, for they fancied a change passed over her wan face. “i never dreamed of such a thing. “hush! don’t say anything,” she whispered, adding aloud, “it’s nothing. “oh, i should merely say, quite calmly and decidedly, ‘thank you, mr. carrol of jo. ” “tell me all about it, jo. putting on a big apron, she fell to work and got the dishes piled up ready for washing, when she discovered that the fire was out. mrs. ” he meant it to be a good-natured joke, but that one word sealed his fate. and p. “don’t eat much supper, and come away at eleven when i send hannah for you. i’m ready. you laugh at me when i say i want to be a lady, but i mean a true gentlewoman in mind and manners, and i try to do it as far as i know how. the big chamber was the scene of many innocent revels. well, if the boy held his tongue because he promised, and not from obstinacy, i’ll forgive him. i can’t dance anymore, but as soon as supper is over, watch for hannah and tell me the minute she comes. timidly she crept from her lattice, put her hand on roderigo’s shoulder, and was about to leap gracefully down when “alas! alas for zara!” she forgot her train. she put it away, but it haunted her, not delightfully as a new dress should, but dreadfully like the ghost of a folly that was not easily laid. so the only way in which he could express his rapture was to look at her, with an expression which glorified his face to such a degree that there actually seemed to be little rainbows in the drops that sparkled on his beard. i’ll give him a hearty scolding and bring him over to beg pardon,” cried jo, burning to execute immediate justice. amy was gratified, but of course didn’t show it, and demurely answered, “foreign life polishes one in spite of one’s self. “going to college, i suppose?” meg’s lips asked the question, but her eyes added, “and what becomes of you?” “yes, it’s high time he went, for he is ready, and as soon as he is off, i shall turn soldier. ” “i don’t want to have you, so run away and help daisy make patty cakes. ” “it isn’t made or trimmed,” sighed meg, faintly, for a sudden recollection of the cost still to be incurred quite overwhelmed her. bless his dear heart, he’s been doing it all his life—helping poor boys, i mean, not getting rich, that he’ll never be. she caught endless colds sitting on damp grass to book ‘a delicious bit’, composed of a stone, a stump, one mushroom, and a broken mullein stalk, or ‘a heavenly mass of clouds’, that looked like a choice display of featherbeds when done. “yes, come next month. our rooms are on the rue de rivoli, and sitting on the balcony, we look up and down the long, brilliant street. i wouldn’t, meg, your mother doesn’t like it, you know,” he whispered, leaning over her chair, as ned turned to refill her glass and fisher stooped to pick up her fan. ” “i’m glad of it!” muttered jo, tying on her hat with a jerk. hummel came to beg pardon for her thoughtlessness and to get a shroud for minna, the neighbors sent all sorts of comforts and good wishes, and even those who knew her best were surprised to find how many friends shy little beth had made. “this rook is poor and hasn’t got any rich relations, has he?” “no, but he has many warm friends. at the conclusion of the ceremonies, beth retired to her room, overcome with emotion and lobster, but there was no place of repose, for the beds were not made, and she found her grief much assuaged by beating up the pillows and putting things in order. but i am afraid i don’t,” and meg shook her head, as she thought regretfully of all the pretty things she wanted. ” “and what are you going to do with yourself now, if i may ask?” “polish up my other talents, and be an ornament to society, if i get the chance. ” “capital boys, aren’t they? i feel quite young and brisk again after that. of course that settled it. thank gott, we germans believe in sentiment, and keep ourselves young mit it. i’m done with you forever. the little girls had a private tea party, and ted roved among the edibles at his own sweet will. did you?” asked jo, rumpling up her hair, and making herself comfortable. but the instant she vanished, meg began to sidle toward the door, murmuring. i think by saturday night you will find that all play and no work is as bad as all work and no play. “hannah left it on the kitchen table a minute, and the kittens got at it. ” then she drew her hand over her eyes, for one of her boyish habits was never to know where her handkerchief was, and had just managed to call up a smile when there came a knock at the porch door. jo regarded them as worthy of bacon, milton, or shakespeare, and remodeled her own works with good effect, she thought. if he asked her to deliver a latin oration, it would not have seemed a more impossible task to bashful beth, but there was no place to run to, no jo to hide behind now, and the poor boy looked so wistfully at her that she bravely resolved to try. “i know you are angry, john, but i can’t help it. “oh, jo, can’t you?” “teddy, dear, i wish i could!” that was all, except a little pause. on one occasion, mr. i don’t feel so forlorn, and will try to bear it if it comes. in came amy, quite calm and delightfully cordial to the one guest who had kept her promise. ” “hold your tongue, you disrespectful old bird!” cried polly, tumbling off the chair with a bounce, and running to peck the ‘rattlepated’ boy, who was shaking with laughter at the last speech. this dauntless example fired zara. ” “my dear, what are they?” “i’ll settle bethy’s troubles, and then i’ll tell you mine. “i had a little girl once, with eyes like these. it is not well, and i haf no patience with those who make this harm. as the clock struck nine and jo proposed bed, meg suddenly left her chair and, taking beth’s stool, leaned her elbows on her mother’s knee, saying bravely. for a minute she stared at it as if it had been a snake, then she read her letter and began to cry. her solitary breakfast did not taste good, and the room seemed lonely and untidy, for jo had not filled the vases, beth had not dusted, and amy’s books lay scattered about. i saw goethe’s house, schiller’s statue, and dannecker’s famous ‘ariadne. ” “is it a birthday, anniversary, or anything?” “no, i’m tired of being dowdy, so i dressed up as a change. it’s very kind and respectful, but think how dreadful for me!” meg leaned against her mother, looking the image of despair, and jo tramped about the room, calling laurie names. she had to wash the cups every morning, and polish up the old-fashioned spoons, the fat silver teapot, and the glasses till they shone. i felt it, and now it’s worse than i imagined. he will go,” said jo, looking relieved as the idea occurred to her. “_oh_, beth, so much, so much!” and jo’s head went down upon the pillow beside her sister’s. “people want to be amused, not preached at, you know. everyone missed beth. now she remembered the little umbrella, which she had forgotten to take in her hurry to be off, but regret was unavailing, and nothing could be done but borrow one or submit to a drenching. “oh, he made a mountain out of a molehill. but, dear heart, we all have our little weaknesses, and find it easy to pardon such in the young, who satisfy our eyes with their comeliness, and keep our hearts merry with their artless vanities. “tell about the party! tell about the party!” with what meg called ‘a great want of manners’ jo had saved some bonbons for the little girls, and they soon subsided, after hearing the most thrilling events of the evening. “only what your grandpa told us about him, how he took good care of his own mother till she died, and wouldn’t go abroad as tutor to some nice person because he wouldn’t leave her. “i’m glad to hear you say so, dear, for i was afraid home would seem dull and poor to you after your fine quarters,” replied her mother, who had given her many anxious looks that day. beth must think i’m going to please myself, as i am, for i can’t talk about laurie to her. therefore the shock she received can better be imagined than described, when he said in a perfectly tranquil tone, “do you care to dance?” “one usually does at a ball. jo’s face was very sober, but her eyes twinkled, and there was an odd sound in her voice of repressed emotion of some sort. she never broke her word, and was much exercised in her mind how to get round it, and at last devised a plan whereby she could satisfy herself. i never can look him in the face again. can i do it?” asked beth, a few weeks after that eventful call of his. k. laurie’s heart wouldn’t ache. see paragraph 1. i need a figure. the little chair stood in its old place. meg received his humble apology, and was much comforted by the assurance that brooke knew nothing of the joke. “i should like much to send all the rest after him,” muttered the professor, coming back with a relieved air. ” meg was amy’s confidant and monitor, and by some strange attraction of opposites jo was gentle beth’s. i’ll stay with you. bangs at once,” commanded meg. i said when we first met that you had improved. it’s so simple you can eat it, and being soft, it will slip down without hurting your sore throat. ” frank, beth, amy, and grace sat down to watch the game played by the other eight. it was a cheerful, hopeful letter, full of lively descriptions of camp life, marches, and military news, and only at the end did the writer’s heart over-flow with fatherly love and longing for the little girls at home. but o’er _her_ grave we may not weep, we know not where it may be. i must say, i like to serve a decayed gentleman better than a blarnerying beggar. “her son, she said, who was in the army. what will mother say? i wonder if her. brooke looked so contented and cheerful that meg was ashamed to lament her hard lot. therefore, no one thought of imagining that he cared more for her than for the others. ” “what else? the horses are ready. one thing disturbed her satisfaction, and that was that she did not tell them at home. it became a sort of boys’ paradise, and laurie suggested that it should be called the ‘bhaer-garten’, as a compliment to its master and appropriate to its inhabitants. she wondered what the business was that brought mr. half-finished boats and bits of string lay among the manuscripts. well, we were hardly settled here, when he turned up again, saying he had come for a holiday, and was going to switzerland. ” “your mamma prefers other accomplishments, i fancy. “well, we’ll look at it. laurie knew them abroad, and liked the boys. section 5. “actually married?” “very much so, thank you. “very well indeed!” said mr. happy, thoughtful times there in the old study which jo called ‘the church of one member’, and from which she came with fresh courage, recovered cheerfulness, and a more submissive spirit. each put on one nice light glove, and carried one soiled one, and all pronounced the effect “quite easy and fine”. ” “now don’t be a wet-blanket, teddy. he isn’t sentimental, doesn’t say much about it, but i see and feel it in all he says and does, and it makes me so happy and so humble that i don’t seem to be the same girl i was. brooke was only interested in domestic news. you shall be commander of the expedition, and i’ll obey blindly, will that satisfy you?” said jo, with a sudden change from perversity to lamblike submission. “what has that boy been about? don’t try to shield him. “i’ll send my bill, by-and-by, and tonight i’ll give you something that will warm the cockles of your heart better than quarts of wine,” said laurie, beaming at her with a face of suppressed satisfaction at something. “i’m glad of that! i didn’t think you’d been a very bad boy, but i fancied you might have wasted money at that wicked baden-baden, lost your heart to some charming frenchwoman with a husband, or got into some of the scrapes that young men seem to consider a necessary part of a foreign tour. i’ll try again, and if that fails, why then. they had always done this from the time they could lisp. ” “wouldn’t it be fun if all the castles in the air which we make could come true, and we could live in them?” said jo, after a little pause. “i telegraphed to your mother yesterday, and brooke answered she’d come at once, and she’ll be here tonight, and everything will be all right. “sometimes,” he answered modestly. that’s the secret of his liking, i suspect. i was sorry about meg, and begged pardon like a man, but i won’t do it again, when i wasn’t in the wrong. gossip as other girls do, and be interested in dress and flirtations and whatever nonsense comes up. “i observed that amy took drumsticks at dinner, ran errands for her mother all the afternoon, gave meg her place tonight, and has waited on every one with patience and good humor. bhaer’s devotion was sincere, however likewise effective—for honesty is the best policy in love as in law. everyone is very kind, and we are as happy as we can be without you. why dodo, when she caught him in the china closet half an hour afterward, nearly squeezed the breath out of his little body with a tender embrace, instead of shaking him for being there, and why she followed up this novel performance by the unexpected gift of a big slice of bread and jelly, remained one of the problems over which demi puzzled his small wits, and was forced to leave unsolved forever. he said, ‘why mind the fashion? wear a big hat, and be comfortable!’ i said i would if i had one, and he has sent me this, to try me. “never mind, let him take a holiday, and make it up afterward,” said the old gentleman. “miss marsch, i haf a great favor to ask of you,” began the professor, after a moist promenade of half a block. there’s room enough, though i have to sit nearly in the middle, else the boat won’t trim,” returned laurie, as if he rather liked the arrangement. “why, you see i got fidgety, and so did grandpa. so i fancied that your boy might fill the empty place if he tried now. m. “sit down and rest while i put these things away, then i want to consult you about a very serious matter,” said amy, when she had shown her splendor and driven polly into a corner. don’t be dismal or fret, but do your duty and you’ll get your reward, as good mr. kirke called to me one day as i passed mr. ” “i think you could, dear, and i think you ought. give us a light and come on. he flattered himself that he knew jo pretty well, and was, therefore, much amazed by the contradictions of voice, face, and manner, which she showed him in rapid succession that day, for she was in half a dozen different moods in the course of half an hour. ” “i’m going very fast, and he’s getting dearer every minute,” added jo to herself, then with a mental shake she entered into the business with an energy that was pleasant to behold. i was going for a drive and longing for company. the pillow was gone, but there was a barricade, nevertheless, a natural one, raised by time, absence, and change of heart. ” “you’ll feel better about it when somebody comes to take you away. ” they tried to be calm, poor things, as their mother sat up, looking pale but steady, and put away her grief to think and plan for them. forgive me, mother, i’m paid for my silliness now. she really did her best to make amy happy, but, dear me, what mistakes she made. during one of the brief calls he made, he artfully led the conversation to music, and talked away about great singers whom he had seen, fine organs he had heard, and told such charming anecdotes that beth found it impossible to stay in her distant corner, but crept nearer and nearer, as if fascinated. i had a bright idea yesterday, and this is it. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. “get along, you fright!” screamed polly, and at that rude speech amy could not restrain a sniff. meg jumped up, looking both proud and shy, but ‘that man’, as jo called him, actually laughed and said coolly, as he kissed the astonished newcomer, “sister jo, congratulate us!” that was adding insult to injury, it was altogether too much, and making some wild demonstration with her hands, jo vanished without a word. i want to see it go wound. ” “yes, thank goodness!” “why did you go alone?” “didn’t want anyone to know. forgive me, dear. wouldn’t it be nice?” asked jo, looking up with a brighter face. brooke, laughing so infectiously that mrs. it would be pleasing to the saints if one used so fine a rosary as this, instead of wearing it as a vain bijou. “i’ve none to tell. so i thought, as a little lesson, i would show you what happens when everyone thinks only of herself. ” “don’t, that’s her name for me!” and laurie put up his hand with a quick gesture to stop the words spoken in jo’s half-kind, half-reproachful tone. i just wish i could marry meg myself, and keep her safe in the family. “so i will, at once. brooke, looking at his watch. “it’s often so, and we like to watch it, for it is never the same, but always splendid,” replied amy, wishing she could paint it. the portuguese held his tongue like a brick, and walked the plank, while the jolly tars cheered like mad. rainy days i spend in the louvre, revelling in pictures. “here i am, mother! yes, it’s all right. i wanted to be the one to tell you the grand surprise, and have ‘first skim’ as we used to say when we squabbled about the cream. after this amy subsided, till a mania for sketching from nature set her to haunting river, field, and wood, for picturesque studies, and sighing for ruins to copy. “we three will be ready in a minute,” cried amy, running away to wash her hands. “you think then, that it is better to have a few duties and live a little for others, do you?” “lounging and larking doesn’t pay,” observed jo, shaking her head. if i ask him to stay, he’ll think i’m jealous, and i wouldn’t insult him by such an idea. yes, and when i have my flock, i’ll just point to you, and say ‘there’s your model, my lads’. the beloved instrument, seldom touched now had not been moved, and above it beth’s face, serene and smiling, as in the early days, looked down upon them, seeming to say, “be happy. copyright law in creating the project gutenberg™ collection. but after the boys were abed, he sat long before his fire with the tired look on his face and the ‘heimweh’, or homesickness, lying heavy at his heart. ” “you can’t sit with us, for our seats are reserved, and you mustn’t sit alone, so laurie will give you his place, and that will spoil our pleasure. “doesn’t it seem very long to wait?” asked amy, who was in a hurry for the wedding. project gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the project gutenberg trademark. laurence, settling himself in his easy chair to rest after the excitement of the morning. ” “yes, of course. in the autumn, new trials and experiences came to meg. meg didn’t, jo won’t, beth can’t yet, so i shall, and make everything okay all round. though it came in such a very simple guise, that was the crowning moment of both their lives, when, turning from the night and storm and loneliness to the household light and warmth and peace waiting to receive them, with a glad “welcome home!” jo led her lover in, and shut the door. march, aunt and uncle carrol began it, others rapidly joined in, even sallie moffat, after a moment’s hesitation, threw her train over her arm and whisked ned into the ring. funny presents, some of them, but what would have been defects to other eyes were ornaments to grandma’s—for the children’s gifts were all their own. “it’s a fine old place, and will bring a handsome sum, for of course you intend to sell it,” said laurie, as they were all talking the matter over some weeks later. so you’ll not tell, will you?” “i give you my word i won’t, only what shall i say when they ask me?” “just say i looked pretty well and was having a good time. the little house was not far away, and the only bridal journey meg had was the quiet walk with john from the old home to the new. “i should think two long walks this morning would have been enough! it’s cold and dull out, and i advise you to stay warm and dry by the fire, as i do,” said meg with a shiver. “just her father’s way of doing good. after lunch, people strolled about, by twos and threes, through the house and garden, enjoying the sunshine without and within. i’ll tell the girls. ” “if he is old enough to ask the question he is old enough to receive true answers. “your lady may prefer this. it’s a secret, and if i tell you, you must tell me yours. the moment aunt march took her nap, or was busy with company, jo hurried to this quiet place, and curling herself up in the easy chair, devoured poetry, romance, history, travels, and pictures like a regular bookworm. i don’t dare to ask you, mr. she forgot every word of it, hung her head, and answered, “i don’t know,” so softly that john had to stoop down to catch the foolish little reply. ” “i have ever so many wishes, but the pet one is to be an artist, and go to rome, and do fine pictures, and be the best artist in the whole world,” was amy’s modest desire. thank you, ladies. ” “hanged if i do! i’m not going to be lectured and pummelled by everyone, just for a bit of a frolic. just frizzle it, and tie your ribbon so the ends come on your forehead a bit, and it will look like the last fashion. ” she slept on a couch in the room, waking often to renew the fire, to feed, lift, or wait upon the patient creature who seldom asked for anything, and ‘tried not to be a trouble’. “yes,” was all he said, but he turned and strained his eyes to see the island which a greater usurper than even napoleon now made interesting in his sight. everything turned out well, which was a mercy, hannah said, “for my mind was that flustered, mum, that it’s a merrycle i didn’t roast the pudding, and stuff the turkey with raisins, let alone bilin’ of it in a cloth. ” laurie spoke excitedly, and looked ready to carry his threat into execution on the slightest provocation, for he was growing up very fast and, in spite of his indolent ways, had a young man’s hatred of subjection, a young man’s restless longing to try the world for himself. brooke,” laughed meg, looking young and pretty again, as she nodded to him over the teapot. march came and took her place among them, looking as if her holiday had not been much pleasanter than theirs. “would you mind telling me what you’d say?” asked jo more respectfully. president and ladies—i beg pardon, gentlemen—allow me to introduce myself as sam weller, the very humble servant of the club. ” laurie thanked her with a look that made her think in a sudden panic, “oh, deary me! i know he’ll say something, and then what shall i do?” evening meditation and morning work somewhat allayed her fears, and having decided that she wouldn’t be vain enough to think people were going to propose when she had given them every reason to know what her answer would be, she set forth at the appointed time, hoping teddy wouldn’t do anything to make her hurt his poor feelings. a green-covered book appeared, with the same picture inside, and a few words written by their mother, which made their one present very precious in their eyes. ” a short speech, but the quiet decision with which it was uttered contrasted curiously with the young speaker. laurie longed to say something tender and comfortable, but no fitting words came to him, so he stood silent, gently stroking her bent head as her mother used to do. queens of society can’t get on without money, so you mean to make a good match, and start in that way? quite right and proper, as the world goes, but it sounds odd from the lips of one of your mother’s girls. mr. i shall have a new ribbon for my hair, and marmee will lend me her little pearl pin, and my new slippers are lovely, and my gloves will do, though they aren’t as nice as i’d like. she enjoyed herself very much that evening, for she danced to her heart’s content. “i wonder if i shall ever be happy enough to have real lace on my clothes and bows on my caps?” said meg impatiently. jo peeped into his half-open eye, felt his little heart, and finding him stiff and cold, shook her head, and offered her domino box for a coffin. f. now then!” with that she rushed across the street so impetuously that she narrowly escaped annihilation from a passing truck, and precipitated herself into the arms of a stately old gentleman, who said, “i beg pardon, ma’am,” and looked mortally offended. ” “it’s my sister margaret, and you knew it was! do you think she is pretty?” “yes, she makes me think of the german girls, she looks so fresh and quiet, and dances like a lady. everybody remember it’s our laurie, and say, ‘aye!’” cried snodgrass excitedly. he came in gorgeous array, with plumed cap, red cloak, chestnut lovelocks, a guitar, and the boots, of course. i want to open a school for little lads—a good, happy, homelike school, with me to take care of them and fritz to teach them. this is no credit to me, you know, i don’t do anything. they availed themselves of the rare privilege to the fullest extent, for some tried the pleasing experiment of drinking milk while standing on their heads, others lent a charm to leapfrog by eating pie in the pauses of the game, cookies were sown broadcast over the field, and apple turnovers roosted in the trees like a new style of bird. chapter thirty-seven new impressions at three o’clock in the afternoon, all the fashionable world at nice may be seen on the promenade des anglais—a charming place, for the wide walk, bordered with palms, flowers, and tropical shrubs, is bounded on one side by the sea, on the other by the grand drive, lined with hotels and villas, while beyond lie orange orchards and the hills. they were alone together in the chapel, to which her mother did not object when its purpose was explained to her. but we mustn’t stand philandering here. and mrs. “do it for me, there’s a dear girl. king’s son. john. c. for the parents who had taught one child to meet death without fear, were trying now to teach another to accept life without despondency or distrust, and to use its beautiful opportunities with gratitude and power. it’s only an experiment, john, and i want to try it for your sake as much as for mine, because i’ve neglected you shamefully lately, and i’m going to make home what it used to be, if i can. ” “me loves parpar,” said the artful one, preparing to climb the paternal knee and revel in forbidden joys. for an hour this new pair walked and talked, or rested on the wall, enjoying the sweet influences which gave such a charm to time and place, and when an unromantic dinner bell warned them away, amy felt as if she left her burden of loneliness and sorrow behind her in the chateau garden. they don’t mean any harm, i’m sure, but if they knew how we fellows talked about them afterward, they’d mend their ways, i fancy. patronage does not trouble me when it is well meant. 1. ” “my good mother used to help me. ” “don’t you neglect him?” “why, mother, i thought you’d take my part!” “so i do, as far as sympathizing goes, but i think the fault is yours, meg. amy is more docile, will make a good companion for flo, and receive gratefully any help the trip may give her. up he got, groped his way to the piano, laid a kind hand on either of the broad shoulders, and said, as gently as a woman, “i know, my boy, i know. yes, there was a sound of bells at the door below, a cry from hannah, and then laurie’s voice saying in a joyful whisper, “girls, she’s come! she’s come!” chapter nineteen amy’s will while these things were happening at home, amy was having hard times at aunt march’s. if he had any doubts about the reception she would give him, they were set at rest the minute she looked up and saw him, for dropping everything, she ran to him, exclaiming in a tone of unmistakable love and longing. “yes, sir?” and jo’s heart began to beat so hard she was afraid he would hear it. ‘oh, rise!’ she said, extending a hand of marble fairness. i brood too much over my own small affairs, and need stirring up, so as i can be spared this winter, i’d like to hop a little way and try my wings. aunt and flo are very kind, but you seem like one of the family, and it would be so comfortable to have you for a little while. ” down dropped the rubbers, and the tea was very near following, as meg put out her hand, with a face so full of gratitude that mr. see paragraph 1. there was ice cream, actually two dishes of it, pink and white, and cake and fruit and distracting french bonbons and, in the middle of the table, four great bouquets of hot house flowers. “where?” “in your face. “have a good time, dearies!” said mrs. after a grand rummage three of the missing articles were found, one over the bird cage, one covered with ink, and a third burned brown, having been used as a holder. they shout and gesticulate tremendously but cannot agree, and rodrigo is about to bear away the exhausted zara, when the timid servant enters with a letter and a bag from hagar, who has mysteriously disappeared. “yes, mother, perfectly satisfied, thanks to you all, and so happy that i can’t talk about it,” with a look that was far better than words. three months’ vacation—how i shall enjoy it!” exclaimed meg, coming home one warm day to find jo laid upon the sofa in an unusual state of exhaustion, while beth took off her dusty boots, and amy made lemonade for the refreshment of the whole party. she went very slowly across the room, for pride was hard to swallow, and stood by him, but he did not turn his head. “all the rest have gone to monaco for the day. “i wish you were all going, but as you can’t, i shall keep my adventures to tell you when i come back. a long discussion followed, and everyone came out surprising, for everyone did her best. 8 or 1. but a bird sang blithely on a budding bough, close by, the snowdrops blossomed freshly at the window, and the spring sunshine streamed in like a benediction over the placid face upon the pillow, a face so full of painless peace that those who loved it best smiled through their tears, and thanked god that beth was well at last. blimber. i’ve no right to say anything,” as many people would have done. “geese, young ladies,” returns uncle, in a tone that keeps us quiet till flo settles down to enjoy the _flirtations of captain cavendish_, and i have the scenery all to myself. i should choose this if i might,” replied amy, looking with great admiration at a string of gold and ebony beads from which hung a heavy cross of the same. i can’t! i can’t!” down went jo’s face into the wet handkerchief, and she cried despairingly, for she had kept up bravely till now and never shed a tear. “we have our plans. carrol, laying a hand on amy’s. “i did think so, but as they never said anything about it, and you came away, i supposed i was mistaken. unless a copyright notice is included. these boots, an old foil, and a slashed doublet once used by an artist for some picture, were jo’s chief treasures and appeared on all occasions. “marry—no we shouldn’t! if you loved me, jo, i should be a perfect saint, for you could make me anything you like. many were the complaints below, and great the chagrin of the head cook at her failures. ” and away he went, rumbling out the words with his strong voice and a relish which was good to see as well as hear. sacred moments, when heart talked to heart in the silence of the night, turning affliction to a blessing, which chastened grief and strengthened love. “oh no, please don’t, i’d rather not,” she said, trying to withdraw her hand, and looking frightened in spite of her denial. ” “hadn’t you rather have her marry a rich man?” asked jo, as her mother’s voice faltered a little over the last words. i can’t explain exactly, but i want to be above the little meannesses and follies and faults that spoil so many women. “how are you about languages?” asked mrs. you always were a comfort, teddy,” and jo leaned her head on his shoulder, just as she did years ago, when beth lay ill and laurie told her to hold on to him. too stupid to learn, but i love music dearly. knights and ladies, elves and pages, monks and flower girls, all mingled gaily in the dance. “i shall marry whom i please, aunt march, and you can leave your money to anyone you like,” she said, nodding her head with a resolute air. ” “good! didn’t you take your story out of _the sea lion?_” said laurie. the morning charities and ceremonies took so much time that the rest of the day was devoted to preparations for the evening festivities. slipping out, she ran down and, finding a servant, asked if he could get her a carriage. bhaer was dressed in a new suit of black, which made him look more like a gentleman than ever. “i know you will, and i’m ever so much obliged. mother is so splendid, she’d do you heaps of good, and beth would sing to you if i begged her to, and amy would dance. early as it was, he was at the station next morning to see jo off, and thanks to him, she began her solitary journey with the pleasant memory of a familiar face smiling its farewell, a bunch of violets to keep her company, and best of all, the happy thought, “well, the winter’s gone, and i’ve written no books, earned no fortune, but i’ve made a friend worth having and i’ll try to keep him all my life. he was moody, irritable, and pensive by turns, lost his appetite, neglected his dress and devoted much time to playing tempestuously on his piano, avoided jo, but consoled himself by staring at her from his window, with a tragic face that haunted her dreams by night and oppressed her with a heavy sense of guilt by day. when the evening for the small party came, she found that the poplin wouldn’t do at all, for the other girls were putting on thin dresses and making themselves very fine indeed. it was late when she came back, and no one saw her creep upstairs and shut herself into her mother’s room. jo wasn’t ashamed of the great tear that dropped off the end of her nose, and amy never minded the rumpling of her curls as she hid her face on her mother’s shoulder and sobbed out, “i am a selfish girl! but i’ll truly try to be better, so he mayn’t be disappointed in me by-and-by. amy’s face was a study when she saw her sister skim into the next drawing room, kiss all the young ladies with effusion, beam graciously upon the young gentlemen, and join in the chat with a spirit which amazed the beholder. i wish americans were as simple and natural as germans, don’t you? i’m so fond of writing, i should go spinning on forever if motives of economy didn’t stop me, for though i’ve used thin paper and written fine, i tremble to think of the stamps this long letter will need. i think mr. her best tile got a splash of water, which left a sepia tear on the cupid’s cheek. she had a plaintive way of saying, “when papa was rich we did so-and-so,” which was very touching, and her long words were considered ‘perfectly elegant’ by the girls. if i can go down easily, i’ll drop. “i shall get a nice box of faber’s drawing pencils; i really need them,” said amy decidedly. “bring a rail. “i haven’t strength of mind enough to clear up now, so we will sober ourselves with a funeral,” said jo, as they rose, and miss crocker made ready to go, being eager to tell the new story at another friend’s dinner table. ’” continued the perplexed authoress. so, stifling a natural regret at the thought of the home comforts he would leave behind him, he said stoutly, “bless your soul, i’m not superannuated yet. “last summer meg left a pair of gloves over at the laurences’ and only one was returned. “oh, oh, oh! what have you done? i’m spoiled! i can’t go! my hair, oh, my hair!” wailed meg, looking with despair at the uneven frizzle on her forehead. “i shall take some up to mother, though she said we were not to think of her, for she’d take care of herself,” said meg, who presided and felt quite matronly behind the teapot. aunt march likes to have us pay her the compliment of coming in style, and making a formal call. ” “don’t you think the english nation perfect in every respect?” asked sallie. his bushy hair had been cut and smoothly brushed, but didn’t stay in order long, for in exciting moments, he rumpled it up in the droll way he used to do, and jo liked it rampantly erect better than flat, because she thought it gave his fine forehead a jove-like aspect. i don’t understand it. ’ ‘where is the villain?’ ‘in the mauve salon. now, beth, what do you say?” “i should so like to see it printed soon,” was all beth said, and smiled in saying it. “nothing could have been worse,” was amy’s crushing reply. a pleasant winter to you, and may the gods grant you a blissful honeymoon at valrosa! i think fred would be benefited by a rouser. meg had an extra row of little curlpapers across her forehead, jo had copiously anointed her afflicted face with cold cream, beth had taken joanna to bed with her to atone for the approaching separation, and amy had capped the climax by putting a clothespin on her nose to uplift the offending feature. i shall carry you if you don’t go yourself. i’m the only one that has sense enough to keep out of mischief. “don’t say my john, it isn’t proper or true,” but meg’s voice lingered over the words as if they sounded pleasant to her. the company assembled in the long salle a manger, that evening, was such as one sees nowhere but on the continent. “i said ‘pleasant people’, you know,” and meg carefully tied up her shoe as she spoke, so that no one saw her face. “me! i’ve done nothing! what’s she talking about?” cried jo, bewildered. i really couldn’t help it, and it all came about in such a droll way that i must tell you. meg went daily to her pupils, and sewed, or thought she did, at home, but much time was spent in writing long letters to her mother, or reading the washington dispatches over and over. old hannah never wearied of concocting dainty dishes to tempt a capricious appetite, dropping tears as she worked, and from across the sea came little gifts and cheerful letters, seeming to bring breaths of warmth and fragrance from lands that know no winter. she drew them out, turned them over, and relived that pleasant winter at kind mrs. 1. “are you going?” demanded jo, diving for the pillow. “poor little man, he’s worn out with sleep and crying. ” “would it be right for me to do so too?” asked amy, who in her loneliness felt the need of help of some sort, and found that she was apt to forget her little book, now that beth was not there to remind her of it. i want a great many crumples of this sort put into it today,” and meg opened her arms to her sisters, who clung about her with april faces for a minute, feeling that the new love had not changed the old. before the housewives could rest, several people called, and there was a scramble to get ready to see them. all this flashed through his mind in a minute, but not a trace of it appeared in his face, and by the time the paper was turned, and jo’s needle threaded, he was ready to say quite naturally, but very gravely. alone, alone, ah! woe, alone, and at the lines. “if i had taken part in it i’d have done it better than this, and have written a sensible note. jo sat as if blandly unconscious of it all, with deportment like maud’s face, ‘icily regular, splendidly null’. ” “i’m afraid laurie is hardly grown-up enough for meg, and altogether too much of a weathercock just now for anyone to depend on. the parlor was always bright and attractive, the chessboard ready, the piano in tune, plenty of gay gossip, and a nice little supper set forth in tempting style. scott to dinner by special invitation, and served him up a pleasant feast without a cooked wife for the first course, on which occasion she was so gay and gracious, and made everything go off so charmingly, that mr. the comical side of the affair suddenly struck her, and she laughed till the tears ran down her cheeks. i can’t show off tonight. presently she put it on his knee, merely saying, “how do you like that?” he looked and then he smiled, as he could not well help doing, for it was capitally done, the long, lazy figure on the grass, with listless face, half-shut eyes, and one hand holding a cigar, from which came the little wreath of smoke that encircled the dreamer’s head. march told how he had longed to surprise them, and how, when the fine weather came, he had been allowed by his doctor to take advantage of it, how devoted brooke had been, and how he was altogether a most estimable and upright young man. ” “it’s not her health that troubles me now, it’s her spirits. ) “being sensible girls, they decided to try her advice, and soon were surprised to see how well off they were. jo immediately knocked again. ” “oh, did she?” and mr. but please hug and kiss me, everyone, and don’t mind my dress. “mees marsch, for what do you laugh in your master’s face? haf you no respect for me, that you go on so bad?” “how can i be respectful, sir, when you forget to take your hat off?” said jo. “i dote upon it. she was too tired, sometimes, even to smile, john grew dyspeptic after a course of dainty dishes and ungratefully demanded plain fare. do, meg! i’ll be ever so good,” pleaded amy, looking as pathetic as she could. but everything seemed against her. in a few minutes jo bounced in, laid herself on the sofa, and affected to read. she had long wanted to behold these hidden glories, and to know the laurence boy, who looked as if he would like to be known, if he only knew how to begin. if anyone had been watching her, he would have thought her movements decidedly peculiar, for on alighting, she went off at a great pace till she reached a certain number in a certain busy street. ” here a little hand slipped into his, and beth looked up at him with a face full of gratitude, as she said, in her earnest yet timid way. i did actually run, and whisked round the corner where i felt safe. “let’s give it to him,” whispered laurie to jo, who nodded and asked at once. tell the girl to put it away for your tea. “nothing but wait. “i think too much of my looks and hate to work, but won’t any more, if i can help it. ” “oh, dear, i’m so sorry, for you’ll get to liking it better and better, and will waste time and money, and grow like those dreadful boys. we have such funny times, and now i can enjoy them, for everyone is so desperately good, it’s like living in a nest of turtledoves. they are not so interesting to me as tina and the boys, but i do my duty by them, and they are fond of me. “can’t be helped, marmee, so you must resign yourself to all sorts of worries, and let your birds hop out of the nest, one by one. ‘your geese will tell you, they know everything. “i had a queer time with aunt today, and, as i got the best of it, i’ll tell you about it,” began jo, who dearly loved to tell stories. the professor was very patient with me, but it must have been torment to him, and now and then he’d look at me with such an expression of mild despair that it was a toss-up with me whether to laugh or cry. as he sat propped up in a big chair by beth’s sofa, with the other three close by, and hannah popping in her head now and then ‘to peek at the dear man’, nothing seemed needed to complete their happiness. when last seen, she was sitting at the gate, watching the butcher’s cart, and it is feared that some villain, tempted by her charms, basely stole her. the invitations were sent, nearly all accepted, and the following monday was set apart for the grand event. i look in with loving eyes, for folded here, with well-known care, a goodly gathering lies, the record of a peaceful life— gifts to gentle child and girl, a bridal gown, lines to a wife, a tiny shoe, a baby curl. mr. she opened with hospitable haste, and started as if another ghost had come to surprise her, for there stood a tall bearded gentleman, beaming on her from the darkness like a midnight sun. the table was just complete then. ” and away went amy to lay her plan before her sisters. he will stay and do his work faithfully as long as he can, and we won’t ask for him back a minute sooner than he can be spared. “you don’t mean to live there?” “yes, i do. “ah, that depends on who wears the apron!” and laurie gave an audacious tweak at the tassel. i’m growing as thin as a shadow, and am thirty. laurence used to be of the child who died, and how he kept all her little things carefully. how beth laughed when she saw it, how laurie ran up and down to bring in the gifts, and what ridiculous speeches jo made as she presented them. “you can do better than this, jo. i said no more, for i think i know it,” and jo told her little story. she didn’t know what would have become of her. “by the way, jo, i think that little parker is really getting desperate about amy. but beth, though yearning for the grand piano, could not pluck up courage to go to the ‘mansion of bliss’, as meg called it. “santa claus,” said beth. “you said the other day you thought we were a deal happier than the king children, for they were fighting and fretting all the time, in spite of their money. “and yet your life is very different from the one you pictured so long ago. aunt march never petted any one; she did not approve of it, but she meant to be kind, for the well-behaved little girl pleased her very much, and aunt march had a soft place in her old heart for her nephew’s children, though she didn’t think it proper to confess it. then you can have the little cake with sugar on it. i liked the things and the kisses, but it was dreadful to have you sit looking at me while i opened the bundles,” said beth, who was toasting her face and the bread for tea at the same time. you are older. at the top of these steps he came plump upon a sight that took his breath away and chilled his blood. “most remarkable children i ever saw. “i never was more staggered in my life. march, as the hymn ended, for no one cared to try another. moffat, who judged others by herself, and the sensible resolution to be contented with the simple wardrobe which suited a poor man’s daughter was weakened by the unnecessary pity of girls who thought a shabby dress one of the greatest calamities under heaven. i always wanted to do the killing part. boys make such a row, and my head is weak. “want any more?” asked the old gentleman, looking grim and vexed, but trying not to show it. “a gloomy wood,” according to the one playbill, was represented by a few shrubs in pots, green baize on the floor, and a cave in the distance. ‘go in and win, my hearties!’ says the captain, and a tremendous fight began. the warm spring sunshine brought out all sorts of aspiring ideas, tender hopes, and happy thoughts. such hours are beautiful to live, but very hard to describe, so i will leave it to the imagination of my readers, merely saying that the house was full of genuine happiness, and that meg’s tender hope was realized, for when beth woke from that long, healing sleep, the first objects on which her eyes fell were the little rose and mother’s face. ” chapter three the laurence boy “jo! jo! where are you?” cried meg at the foot of the garret stairs. ” “how funny!” laughed grace. meg returned to her place, and supper was progressing pleasantly, when the little ghost walked again, and exposed the maternal delinquencies by boldly demanding, “more sudar, marmar. meg’s eyes kept filling in spite of herself, jo was obliged to hide her face in the kitchen roller more than once, and the little girls wore a grave, troubled expression, as if sorrow was a new experience to them. i’m not too proud to beg for father. if i arrive late, you’ll say a good word for me, won’t you, beth?” something in the boy’s face troubled his little friend, but she said cheerfully, with her quiet eyes on the changing clouds, “if people really want to go, and really try all their lives, i think they will get in, for i don’t believe there are any locks on that door or any guards at the gate. he gave a short laugh, shook hands with her, and, putting his finger under her chin, turned up her face, examined it gravely, and let it go, saying with a nod, “you’ve got your grandfather’s spirit, if you haven’t his face. in an evil moment the shopman held up the lovely, shimmering folds, and said, “a bargain, i assure, you, ma’am. “see,” said meg, coming up with a white, half-opened rose, “i thought this would hardly be ready to lay in beth’s hand tomorrow if she—went away from us. bhaer?” she asked, turning her back to him, and feeling deeply grateful for the chance of hiding her face. amy does too—i see it in her eyes, though she prudently waits to turn it over in her mind before she speaks. ” and there she paused diplomatically. chapter twenty-seven literary lessons fortune suddenly smiled upon jo, and dropped a good luck penny in her path. “que pensez-vous?” she said, airing her french, which had improved in quantity, if not in quality, since she came abroad. so beth lay down on the sofa, the others returned to their work, and the hummels were forgotten. “it’s very nice of him to send you flowers, isn’t it?” said annie, looking wise about nothing. march, “what can you expect when i have four gay girls in the house, and a dashing young neighbor over the way?” the three years that have passed have brought but few changes to the quiet family. ” “i’ll try and be what he loves to call me, ‘a little woman’ and not be rough and wild, but do my duty here instead of wanting to be somewhere else,” said jo, thinking that keeping her temper at home was a much harder task than facing a rebel or two down south. org/donate. a sympathizing friend sends the following gem: a lament for s. they know we are poor, so it’s no use pretending that we have grooms, buy three or four hats a season, and have things as easy and fine as they do. “rather a rough road for you to travel, my little pilgrims, especially the latter part of it. he knew my father years ago, and he sent me a polite note this afternoon, saying he hoped i would allow him to express his friendly feeling toward my children by sending them a few trifles in honor of the day. there a bare-legged shepherd, in wooden shoes, pointed hat, and rough jacket over one shoulder, sat piping on a stone while his goats skipped among the rocks or lay at his feet. ” meg spoke as if to herself, and glanced out at the lane where she had often seen lovers walking together in the summer twilight. “i was very unwise to let you go among people of whom i know so little, kind, i dare say, but worldly, ill-bred, and full of these vulgar ideas about young people. mine is so elastic, it never seems full now, and i used to be quite contented with my family. the little girl was very sincere in all this, for being left alone outside the safe home nest, she felt the need of some kind hand to hold by so sorely that she instinctively turned to the strong and tender friend, whose fatherly love most closely surrounds his little children. don’t tempt me, teddy, it’s a crazy plan. send me as much advice as you like. if you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. her experience and miscellaneous reading were of service now, for they gave her some idea of dramatic effect, and supplied plot, language, and costumes. a polish count, aged eighteen, devoted himself to the ladies, who pronounced him, ‘a fascinating dear’, and a german serene something, having come to supper alone, roamed vaguely about, seeking what he might devour. “i shall tell them myself all about it, and ‘fess’ to mother how silly i’ve been. “it’s only me, sir, come to return a book,” she said blandly, as she entered. during the fifteen minutes that followed, the proud and sensitive little girl suffered a shame and pain which she never forgot. march glanced at meg, who was looking very pretty in her gingham morning gown, with the little curls blowing about her forehead, and very womanly, as she sat sewing at her little worktable, full of tidy white rolls, so unconscious of the thought in her mother’s mind as she sewed and sang, while her fingers flew and her thoughts were busied with girlish fancies as innocent and fresh as the pansies in her belt, that mrs. the dim, dusty room, with the busts staring down from the tall bookcases, the cozy chairs, the globes, and best of all, the wilderness of books in which she could wander where she liked, made the library a region of bliss to her. we won’t ask for jelly. she was quite right, for the mischief-loving lad no sooner suspected a mystery than he set himself to find it out, and led jo a trying life of it. me’s tummin!” “it’s that naughty boy. meg had a cushion, jo a book, beth a basket, and amy a portfolio. but you are not merely a businessman, you love good and beautiful things, enjoy them yourself, and let others go halves, as you always did in the old times. after this, meg had mr. he had not foreseen this turn of affairs, and was not prepared for it. very likely some mrs. roderigo and don pedro flew to the rescue, and all were taken out unhurt, though many were speechless with laughter. any mention of her ‘works’ always had a bad effect upon jo, who either grew rigid and looked offended, or changed the subject with a brusque remark, as now. and now we get on nicely, and are very glad he came, for he speaks french like a native, and i don’t know what we should do without him. ” for a moment jo looked as if she would agree, for wild as the plan was, it just suited her. there’s plenty of room for dozens inside, and splendid grounds outside. you agree that the foundation, the trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such damage. “no, thank you. in this room there was a wardrobe full of old-fashioned costumes with which esther allowed her to play, and it was her favorite amusement to array herself in the faded brocades, and parade up and down before the long mirror, making stately curtsies, and sweeping her train about with a rustle which delighted her ears. “you needn’t be so rude, it’s only a ‘lapse of lingy’, as mr. it broke the ice in the beginning by producing a laugh, it created quite a refreshing breeze, flapping to and fro as she rowed, and would make an excellent umbrella for the whole party, if a shower came up, she said. “so are you. ” “we can’t, for something has been said, and laurie’s mischief has spoiled you for me. i told him to go to sleep alone, and here he is, downstairs, getting his death a-cold pattering over that canvas,” said meg, answering the call. he was poor, yet always appeared to be giving something away; a stranger, yet everyone was his friend; no longer young, but as happy-hearted as a boy; plain and peculiar, yet his face looked beautiful to many, and his oddities were freely forgiven for his sake. “goodbye, meggy, i hope the kings won’t strain today. ” “strong language, mademoiselle. that satisfied her, and without waiting for him to speak, she said, in her sprightly way. now, the old sofa was a regular patriarch of a sofa—long, broad, well-cushioned, and low, a trifle shabby, as well it might be, for the girls had slept and sprawled on it as babies, fished over the back, rode on the arms, and had menageries under it as children, and rested tired heads, dreamed dreams, and listened to tender talk on it as young women. i only moaned a trifle to keep the girls company. i don’t believe i could have done it as kindly as you did,” added beth from her pillow. “it’s worse than boots, it’s a silk dress,” she said, with the calmness of desperation, for she wanted the worst over. she was affecting to write busily one saturday afternoon, when she and beth were alone together. meg has john and the babies to comfort her, but you must stand by father and mother, won’t you jo?” “if i can. step into the garden, scott, while i look up mrs. you have seen it on dozens of girls, and you never found out that it was pretty till now—stupide!” “i never saw it on you before, which accounts for the mistake, you see. if the amiable gentleman who wrote that kindly note could have known what intense happiness he was giving a fellow creature, i think he would devote his leisure hours, if he has any, to that amusement, for jo valued the letter more than the money, because it was encouraging, and after years of effort it was so pleasant to find that she had learned to do something, though it was only to write a sensation story. they drank healths, told stories, sang songs, ‘reminisced’, as the old folks say, and had a thoroughly good time. “and i needn’t go away, but may stay and be happy, may i, dear?” here was another fine chance to make the crushing speech and the stately exit, but meg never thought of doing either, and disgraced herself forever in jo’s eyes by meekly whispering, “yes, john,” and hiding her face on mr. march had advised the plan. we want to know you, and i’ve been trying to do it this ever so long. it’s a great misfortune to have such strong likes and dislikes, isn’t it?” “it’s a greater not to be able to hide them. “what shall you tell her?” asked meg, full of curiosity to know his opinion of her, yet feeling ill at ease with him for the first time. “i always said she was a little saint,” added meg, as if there could be no further doubt of it. it is one he values much, and i’ve often admired it, set up in the place of honor with his german bible, plato, homer, and milton, so you may imagine how i felt when he brought it down, without its cover, and showed me my own name in it, “from my friend friedrich bhaer”. i rather enjoy this, and now i’ll imitate what is called ‘a charming girl’. i’m afraid i couldn’t like him without a spice of human naughtiness. i never knew how good and generous and tender he was till now, for he lets me read his heart, and i find it full of noble impulses and hopes and purposes, and am so proud to know it’s mine. ” coffee was a treat, and hannah showed great tact in making it that morning. bhaer to the city, and finally decided that he had been appointed to some great honor, somewhere, but had been too modest to mention the fact. the hall was empty, and they had a grand polka, for laurie danced well, and taught her the german step, which delighted jo, being full of swing and spring. i hate ordinary people! thursday yesterday was a quiet day spent in teaching, sewing, and writing in my little room, which is very cozy, with a light and fire. “no, it isn’t morning yet. the other lion was the fact that they were poor and laurie rich, for this made them shy of accepting favors which they could not return. f. if it had not been for tina on her knee. she found it harder to bear than the others because she could remember a time when home was beautiful, life full of ease and pleasure, and want of any kind unknown. so jo was satisfied with the investment of her prize money, and fell to work with a cheery spirit, bent on earning more of those delightful checks. beth says i never know when to stop. the prize-story experience had seemed to open a way which might, after long traveling and much uphill work, lead to this delightful chateau en espagne. ” there jo stopped, and looked undecided whether to tell or to laugh. he was one of the men who are at home with children, and looked particularly well when little faces made a pleasant contrast with his manly one. “if you like them so much, come down and see ours. she shook hands in a gentlemanly manner, but amy kissed both the aunts, and the girls departed, leaving behind them the impression of shadow and sunshine, which impression caused aunt march to say, as they vanished. ” “more than any one in the world, beth. oh, dear, yes, he liked it amazingly! and was so touched and pleased by that confiding little kiss that all his crustiness vanished, and he just set her on his knee, and laid his wrinkled cheek against her rosy one, feeling as if he had got his own little granddaughter back again. meg forgot her foot and rose so quickly that she was forced to catch hold of jo, with an exclamation of pain. let her alone, be kind and patient, and father’s coming will settle everything,” replied her mother. beth’s stage-struck!” cried meg, and the rehearsal ended in a general burst of laughter. she studied faces in the street, and characters, good, bad, and indifferent, all about her. is requested not to whistle in the street. this hitch in the mainspring of the domestic machinery had a bad effect upon the whole concern, but amy’s motto was ‘nil desperandum’, and having made up her mind what to do, she proceeded to do it in spite of all obstacles. the woman saw me look at it, and picked out a long lock for me to keep. “how can i be afraid when you have been so kind to father? i only wish i could thank you for it. can i do anything for you, young ladies?” asked mrs. and amy, the dignified, tumbled over a stool, and never stopping to get up, hugged and cried over her father’s boots in the most touching manner. germans like messes. kirke remembered some old brocades, and miss norton lent me lace and feathers. they are not very wearing, so they’ll keep. he felt more at ease upon his legs, and amy found it pleasant to have a strong arm to lean upon, a familiar face to smile at her, and a kind voice to talk delightfully for her alone. “you’ll get over this after a while, and find some lovely accomplished girl, who will adore you, and make a fine mistress for your fine house. the unquenchables had done their best to be worthy of the name, for like elves they had worked by night and conjured up a comical surprise. if he goes on like the rejected lovers in books, you’ll give in, rather than hurt his feelings. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when you share it without charge with others. “so am i, but a kind word will govern me when all the king’s horses and all the king’s men couldn’t,” said jo, trying to say a kind word for her friend, who seemed to get out of one scrape only to fall into another. ” “don’t preach. we all are here in perfect health, none gone from our small band: again we see each well-known face, and press each friendly hand. it didn’t much matter, for mr. “how silly!” said jo. just before school closed, jo appeared, wearing a grim expression as she stalked up to the desk, and delivered a letter from her mother, then collected amy’s property, and departed, carefully scraping the mud from her boots on the door mat, as if she shook the dust of the place off her feet. here’s a line, and there’s another. meg bathed the insulted hand with glycerine and tears, beth felt that even her beloved kittens would fail as a balm for griefs like this, jo wrathfully proposed that mr. you had better ask mother’s leave before you order anything,” returned meg prudently. john was a little disappointed not to find a tender niobe, but feeling that his dignity demanded the first apology, he made none, only came leisurely in and laid himself upon the sofa with the singularly relevant remark, “we are going to have a new moon, my dear. some of the best and most honored women i know were poor girls, but so love-worthy that they were not allowed to be old maids. but whether the sorrow was too vast to be embodied in music, or music too ethereal to uplift a mortal woe, he soon discovered that the requiem was beyond him just at present. “i hope there will be more wheat and fewer tares every year,” said amy softly. every shadowy nook, where seats invited one to stop and rest, was a mass of bloom, every cool grotto had its marble nymph smiling from a veil of flowers and every fountain reflected crimson, white, or pale pink roses, leaning down to smile at their own beauty. four sisters, parted for an hour, none lost, one only gone before, made by love’s immortal power, nearest and dearest evermore. i am a stupid thing, and ought to be studying, not playing,” was beth’s resolution, while amy followed their example by heroically declaring, “i shall learn to make buttonholes, and attend to my parts of speech. cutter was in a hurry and said ‘no’, rather crossly, so she was going away, looking hungry and sorry, when mr. “they do sometimes,” said a muffled voice from the post. ” “mothers have need of sharp eyes and discreet tongues when they have girls to manage. he restrained himself however, and the little squall would have blown over, but for one unlucky word. even you cast me off over there, and i felt just ready to go to the deuce,” he began apologetically. it’s too warm to be particular about one’s parts of speech,” murmured jo. and so, at last they came to the library, where she clapped her hands and pranced, as she always did when especially delighted. he stood a minute looking at her with new eyes, seeing what no one had ever seen before, the tender side of amy’s character. my silk sacque isn’t a bit the fashion, and my bonnet doesn’t look like sallie’s. “i’m very sorry to hear of this, miss march,” he said, in the kind, quiet tone which sounded very pleasantly to her perturbed spirit. he did not tell her so, but she was not disappointed, for both felt the truth, were satisfied, and gladly left the rest to silence. as usual beth lay on the sofa and laurie sat in a low chair close by, amusing her with all sorts of gossip, for she depended on her weekly ‘spin’, and he never disappointed her. “how will we give the things?” asked meg. “you won’t stop, i know, as long as you can trail round in a white gown with your hair down, and wear gold-paper jewelry. meg made many moral rules, and tried to keep them, but what mother was ever proof against the winning wiles, the ingenious evasions, or the tranquil audacity of the miniature men and women who so early show themselves accomplished artful dodgers? “no more raisins, demi. don’t you wish we had the money papa lost when we were little, jo? dear me! how happy and good we’d be, if we had no worries!” said meg, who could remember better times. having copied her novel for the fourth time, read it to all her confidential friends, and submitted it with fear and trembling to three publishers, she at last disposed of it, on condition that she would cut it down one third, and omit all the parts which she particularly admired. “which will you have, beth? there ain’t no need of but one,” aid hannah. he is an odd old gentleman, but that pleased him. “how’s the little mamma? where is everybody? why didn’t you tell me before i came home?” began laurie in a loud whisper. long may our paper prosper well, our club unbroken be, and coming years their blessings pour on the useful, gay ‘p. say you will, and let’s be happy. after pacing to and fro in much agitation, he struck his forehead, and burst out in a wild strain, singing of his hatred for roderigo, his love for zara, and his pleasing resolution to kill the one and win the other. e. i wanted it dreadfully, and wished i was her with all my might. he bore it as long as he could, but when he was appealed to for an opinion, he blazed up with honest indignation and defended religion with all the eloquence of truth—an eloquence which made his broken english musical and his plain face beautiful. ” and meg smiled her sweetest, in spite of her gray beard and white eyebrows. “if one could have a fine house, full of nice girls, or go traveling, the summer would be delightful, but to stay at home with three selfish sisters and a grown-up boy was enough to try the patience of a boaz,” complained miss malaprop, after several days devoted to pleasure, fretting, and ennui. want of breath brought the impromptu ball to a close, and then people began to go. ” “tell another story, mother, one with a moral to it, like this. the year is gone, we still unite to joke and laugh and read, and tread the path of literature that doth to glory lead. “it beckoned, gliding noiselessly before him down a corridor as dark and cold as any tomb. the baby’s death troubled her, but i dare say she has only got cold. jo disgraced herself by nearly fainting away, and had to be doctored by laurie in the china closet. mr. and i don’t like the way fellows do either, in this country. ” “how kind you are, sir!” beth blushed like a rose under the friendly look he wore, but she was not frightened now, and gave the hand a grateful squeeze because she had no words to thank him for the precious gift he had given her. valrosa well deserved its name, for in that climate of perpetual summer roses blossomed everywhere. “beth and i are going over to kitty bryant’s to get more flowers for tomorrow,” added amy, tying a picturesque hat over her picturesque curls, and enjoying the effect as much as anybody. ” “oh, mother, if i’m ever half as good as you, i shall be satisfied,” cried jo, much touched. i’m sorry, but i know you are too sincerely interested in the cause to mind a little personal disappointment, and you shall have another table if you like. beth ate no more, but crept away to sit in her shadowy corner and brood over the delight to come, till the others were ready. march, who sat sewing in what they called ‘marmee’s corner’. where’s amy?” “your mother has got her down at meg’s. on her right, her only neighbor was a studious looking lad absorbed in a newspaper. when aching heart was a little comforted, troubled mind likewise found help, for one day she went to the study, and leaning over the good gray head lifted to welcome her with a tranquil smile, she said very humbly, “father, talk to me as you did to beth. ” “and come every single day?” “see if i don’t!” “and bring me back the minute beth is well?” “the identical minute. the lobster was instantly surrounded by a halo of pleasing reminiscences, and curiosity about ‘the charming young ladies’ diverted his mind from the comical mishap. ” “you’ll go on as you begin, and amy will rule you all the days of your life. people have been very kind to me, and whenever i see girls struggling along, as we used to do, i want to put out my hand and help them, as i was helped. i’ll tell you one of them, marmee,” she began, as they sat along together. so beth tried it, and everyone pronounced it the most remarkable piano ever heard. copyright law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without permission and without paying copyright royalties. “your deer are much prettier than our ugly buffaloes,” she said, turning to the prairies for help and feeling glad that she had read one of the boys’ books in which jo delighted. ” so, sitting at the dear little piano, beth softly touched the keys, and in the sweet voice they had never thought to hear again, sang to her own accompaniment the quaint hymn, which was a singularly fitting song for her. for now and then she forgot her grown-up ways and acted like a spoiled child. march. well, the babies love me, they don’t care if i am thin and pale and haven’t time to crimp my hair, they are my comfort, and some day john will see what i’ve gladly sacrificed for them, won’t he, my precious?” to which pathetic appeal daisy would answer with a coo, or demi with a crow, and meg would put by her lamentations for a maternal revel, which soothed her solitude for the time being. p. she said nothing, but amy understood the look, and after a minute’s pause, she added gravely, “i wanted to speak to you about this, but i forgot it. bhaer, bring him home to tea. six weeks is a long time to wait, and a still longer time for a girl to keep a secret, but jo did both, and was just beginning to give up all hope of ever seeing her manuscript again, when a letter arrived which almost took her breath away, for on opening it, a check for a hundred dollars fell into her lap. on the afternoon of the second day, she went out to do an errand, and give poor joanna, the invalid doll, her daily exercise. ” john got no further, for meg cast him off, and clasped her hands with a tragic gesture as she fell into a chair, exclaiming in a tone of mingled indignation, reproach, and dismay. she delved in the dust of ancient times for facts or fictions so old that they were as good as new, and introduced herself to folly, sin, and misery, as well as her limited opportunities allowed. ” as amy pointed to the smiling christ child on his mother’s knee, mrs. bhaer, i am so glad to see you!” cried jo, with a clutch, as if she feared the night would swallow him up before she could get him in. in 2001, the project gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future generations. now, start right, and tell me how it all happened. i’m afraid he isn’t having such a merry christmas as we are. we must go shopping tomorrow afternoon, meg. ” i laughed all the way downstairs, but it was a little pathetic, also to think of the poor man having to mend his own clothes. it was not far to the river, but both were ready before amy reached them. “blest if she ain’t in silk from head to foot; ain’t it a relishin’ sight to see her settin’ there as fine as a fiddle, and hear folks calling little amy ‘mis. it was not nearly so well done, but there was a life and spirit in it which atoned for many faults, and it recalled the past so vividly that a sudden change swept over the young man’s face as he looked. “i meant the first dance. he stared a minute, then his whole face woke up, and, waving his hat like a boy, he hurried forward to meet her. ” up went jo, and knocked smartly on the door of laurie’s little study. the farmhouses were my delight, with thatched roofs, ivy up to the eaves, latticed windows, and stout women with rosy children at the doors. no one spoke of it or seemed aware of it, for it had come too gradually to startle those who saw her daily, but to eyes sharpened by absence, it was very plain and a heavy weight fell on jo’s heart as she saw her sister’s face. 7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1. was he nice?” “oh, very! his hair is auburn, not red, and he was very polite, and i had a delicious redowa with him. she did not speak, but she looked up at him with a face made very eloquent by happiness, and a smile which said, “no one can refuse me anything today. her respect and regard for the ‘laurence’ boy increased very much, for he played remarkably well and didn’t put on any airs. her mother thought that there was a trifle too much description. “i wish we could do something for that capital old professor. now what shall i do?” that seemed a hard question to answer, and laurie began to wish he had to work for his daily bread. gingolf to sunny montreux, with the alps of savoy on one side, mont st. i’m so tired i can’t stir. ” she answered, “i’ll take it,” and it was cut off and paid for, and sallie had exulted, and she had laughed as if it were a thing of no consequence, and driven away, feeling as if she had stolen something, and the police were after her. mr. he never talked to her much, but he looked at her a good deal, and she felt sure that he did not regard her with aversion. ” “i’ll go and see what the matter is. “my rouge won’t come off. “what a piece of nonsense we have made! with practice we might do something quite clever. “i haven’t time. shall i sew, read, cone, draw, or do all at once? bring on your bears. one saw it in the lines of her figure, the make and motion of her hands, the flow of her dress, the droop of her hair, unconscious yet harmonious, and as attractive to many as beauty itself. amy was fretting because her lessons were not learned, and she couldn’t find her rubbers. davis be arrested without delay, and hannah shook her fist at the ‘villain’ and pounded potatoes for dinner as if she had him under her pestle. aunt march put on her glasses and took a look at the girl, for she did not know her in this new mood. both felt it, and for a minute looked at one another as if that invisible barrier cast a little shadow over them. she wondered, and was thankful also, that her parents did not seem to see what she saw, and during the quiet weeks when the shadows grew so plain to her, she said nothing of it to those at home, believing that it would tell itself when beth came back no better. “i don’t!” cried jo decidedly. brooke and the umbrella were safely out of the house. they haf no right to put poison in the sugarplum, and let the small ones eat it. a grocerman bought and put it in his shop. she glanced down at him with a new thought in her mind, but he was lying with his hat half over his face, as if for shade, and his mustache hid his mouth. he looked down at her, wondering if she remembered the time, but jo was smiling to herself, as if in truth her troubles had all vanished at his coming. the first of december was a wintry day indeed to them, for a bitter wind blew, snow fell fast, and the year seemed getting ready for its death. ” not being a belle or even a fashionable lady, meg did not experience this affliction till her babies were a year old, for in her little world primitive customs prevailed, and she found herself more admired and beloved than ever. she had confessed her sins and been forgiven, but when she showed her savings and proposed a mountain trip, beth had thanked her heartily, but begged not to go so far away from home. a breath of fresh air seemed to blow through the house, and something better than sunshine brightened the quiet rooms. the smart of her hand and the ache of her heart were forgotten in the sting of the thought, “i shall have to tell at home, and they will be so disappointed in me!” the fifteen minutes seemed an hour, but they came to an end at last, and the word ‘recess!’ had never seemed so welcome to her before. don’t be angry, and oh, don’t tell him i said anything! it was only to show that i cared how you get on, and what is said here is said in confidence, you know,” cried meg, much alarmed at the thought of what might follow from her careless speech. i’ve been fussing over the thing so long, i really don’t know whether it’s good, bad, or indifferent. it will do you good, and no harm, as you go to your father. having told how she disposed of her tales, jo added, “and when i went to get my answer, the man said he liked them both, but didn’t pay beginners, only let them print in his paper, and noticed the stories. wouldn’t your grandpa let you?” “i think he would, if your mother asked him. “now go, dear, but don’t kill yourself driving at a desperate pace. i longed to show them a tearing american gallop, for they trotted solemnly up and down, in their scant habits and high hats, looking like the women in a toy noah’s ark. she did not mention this meeting at home (though she discovered that, thanks to the upset, her new dress was much damaged by the rivulets of dressing that meandered down the skirt), but went through with the preparations which now seemed more irksome than before, and at twelve o’clock all was ready again. ” “abroad!” cried jo. “go away. poor jo looked abashed, and silently chafed the end of her nose with the stiff handkerchief, as if performing a penance for her misdemeanors. mrs. change of air and care will keep you well, i dare say, or if it does not entirely, you will have the fever more lightly. brooke made no comment as she returned the book to meg, who said innocently, “i thought it was poetry. ” and he looked up and laughed outright, for jo’s prim manner was rather funny when he remembered how they had chatted about cricket when he brought the cat home. ” chapter forty the valley of the shadow when the first bitterness was over, the family accepted the inevitable, and tried to bear it cheerfully, helping one another by the increased affection which comes to bind households tenderly together in times of trouble. ” jo led the way, and as if used to waiting on ladies, laurie drew up a little table, brought a second installment of coffee and ice for jo, and was so obliging that even particular meg pronounced him a ‘nice boy’. “mercy on me, beth loves laurie!” she said, sitting down in her own room, pale with the shock of the discovery which she believed she had just made. at efening i shall gif a little lesson with much gladness, for look you, mees marsch, i haf this debt to pay. this was jo’s favorite refuge, and here she loved to retire with half a dozen russets and a nice book, to enjoy the quiet and the society of a pet rat who lived near by and didn’t mind her a particle. by-and-by i heard fred’s voice, and then he came hurrying through the great arch to find me. “i’ll go and tell amy,” said meg, feeling a little hurt, yet rather relieved on the whole, for she did not like nursing, and jo did. “we shouldn’t enjoy ourselves half so much as we do now. march was both surprised and touched, and smiled with her eyes full as she examined her presents and read the little notes which accompanied them. she ought to have made an effort and tried to love him. ” “then there’s an end of it!” and he shook off his grandfather’s hands with an impatient motion, for though grateful for the sympathy, his man’s pride could not bear a man’s pity. ” “i will. when mr. now hold your shoulder straight, and take short steps, and don’t shake hands if you are introduced to anyone. i freed my mind about a silly little thing, and he was offended. dashwood put up his feet, with the graceful remark, “poor and proud, as usual, but she’ll do. beth, who was ready first, kept reporting what went on next door, and enlivened her sisters’ toilets by frequent telegrams from the window. nobody will want me, and it’s a mercy, for there should always be one old maid in a family. to begin with, mr. each had made such preparation for the fete as seemed necessary and proper. quite absorbed in her work, jo scribbled away till the last page was filled, when she signed her name with a flourish and threw down her pen, exclaiming. ” “mayn’t i hope you’ll change your mind by-and-by? i’ll wait and say nothing till you have had more time. “then we’ll go and eat up all the raisins. it’s a very queer thing for her to do, she doesn’t act a bit like herself. passers-by probably thought them a pair of harmless lunatics, for they entirely forgot to hail a bus, and strolled leisurely along, oblivious of deepening dusk and fog. other friends told the marches that they had lost all chance of being remembered in the rich old lady’s will, but the unworldly marches only said. “i don’t care,” and jo shut the door, feeling that food was an uncongenial topic just then. “that will do, that will do, young lady. so altogether she had a very nice time, till she overheard a bit of conversation, which disturbed her extremely. a strange sense of helplessness fell upon the girls as the gray bonnet vanished round the corner, and despair seized them when a few minutes later miss crocker appeared, and said she’d come to dinner. “i beg pardon, i thought. “what would jo say if she saw you now?” asked amy impatiently, hoping to stir him up by the mention of her still more energetic sister’s name. amy shook her head and opened her sketchbook with an air of resignation, but she had made up her mind to lecture ‘that boy’ and in a minute she began again. it never was a fashionable school, and the professor did not lay up a fortune, but it was just what jo intended it to be—‘a happy, homelike place for boys, who needed teaching, care, and kindness’. ” “not a prank. ” “when, where, how?” asked jo, in a fever of feminine interest and curiosity, for she could not realize it a particle. “i was trying to get something for meg, who is very tired, and someone shook me, and here i am in a nice state,” answered jo, glancing dismally from the stained skirt to the coffee-colored glove. meg went to the other window, and sewed as if new rosettes for slippers were among the necessaries of life. can’t you make them do?” “i can hold them crumpled up in my hand, so no one will know how stained they are. i guess i’ll go now, before i get frightened thinking about it. ” “i understand, mother, and quite agree, but i’m disappointed about meg, for i’d planned to have her marry teddy by-and-by and sit in the lap of luxury all her days. there were plenty of pretty faces to admire, but the young man took little notice of them, except to glance now and then at some blonde girl in blue. not far away from here lies a poor woman with a little newborn baby. “they eat them when they can get them. i want to say one thing, and then there shall be an end of it,” returned mr. the good soul was wide awake in a minute, and took the lead at once, assuring that there was no need to worry; every one had scarlet fever, and if rightly treated, nobody died, all of which jo believed, and felt much relieved as they went up to call meg. it was a very astonishing year altogether, for things seemed to happen in an unusually rapid and delightful manner. amy followed, but she poked her hands out stiffly before her, and jerked herself along as if she went by machinery, and her “ow!” was more suggestive of pins being run into her than of fear and anguish. i mean it kindly, and don’t want you to spoil your whole life by making a mistake at the beginning. laurie smiled, took it, put it in his vest pocket ‘to keep it from blowing away’, and listened with interest to the lively letter amy read him. now, don’t cry, bethy. i never knew how much there was in shakespeare before, but then i never had a bhaer to explain it to me. “not for a year or two. don’t interfere, i’ll manage him. mrs. maybe she would have helped me, i’m so stupid,” said beth, who stood beside him, listening eagerly. this little bit of byplay excited annie’s curiosity, but meg was too tired for gossip and went to bed, feeling as if she had been to a masquerade and hadn’t enjoyed herself as much as she expected. ” “at the idea of anybody coming to take meg away? no, thank you. both seemed to try his patience sorely, for more than once i heard him say emphatically, “no, no, it is not so, you haf not attend to what i say,” and once there was a loud rap, as if he struck the table with his book, followed by the despairing exclamation, “prut! it all goes bad this day. beth got a cold and took to her bed. “jo and i are going to make fortunes for you all. unfortunately, john didn’t come, not seeing the matter in that light. but it’s not as bad as it looks, and one can get on quite happily if one has something in one’s self to fall back upon. “you hussy, how dare you talk in that way? where’s your respect for me, and your proper bringing up? bless the boys and girls! what torments they are, yet we can’t do without them,” he said, pinching her cheeks good-humoredly. she could not roam about and amuse herself, for the burned breadth would show, so she stared at people rather forlornly till the dancing began. jo was mistaken in that. don’t know anything about the north, but am altogether salubrious and balmy, hey, my lady?” “lovely weather so far. ” “i’ll try, beth. “because if you care much about riches, you will never go and marry a poor man,” said jo, frowning at laurie, who was mutely warning her to mind what she said. 2, who laboured with great industry to make it fair and true. i’ll take it to them, and see what’s going on. “i had an uncommonly good time that day, and haven’t got over it yet. tragedies and cravats, poetry and pickles, garden seeds and long letters, music and gingerbread, rubbers, invitations, scoldings, and puppies. often she started up at night, thinking beth called her, and when the sight of the little empty bed made her cry with the bitter cry of unsubmissive sorrow, “oh, beth, come back! come back!” she did not stretch out her yearning arms in vain. in fact it was an immense relief to them all to have a little work, and they took hold with a will, but soon realized the truth of hannah’s saying, “housekeeping ain’t no joke. i’ll have blanc mange and strawberries for dessert, and coffee too, if you want to be elegant. aunt amy was as yet only a name to them, aunt beth soon faded into a pleasantly vague memory, but aunt dodo was a living reality, and they made the most of her, for which compliment she was deeply grateful. “i saw something i liked this morning, and i meant to tell it at dinner, but i forgot,” said beth, putting jo’s topsy-turvy basket in order as she talked. the door flew open, and in she bounced before laurie could recover from his surprise. he saw the trouble in her face and drew meg’s attention from it by asking quickly, “where have you been calling, all so fine?” “at the gardiners’, and sallie has been telling me all about belle moffat’s wedding. “salt instead of sugar, and the cream is sour,” replied meg with a tragic gesture. ” “no, my dear. it isn’t like you to be forlorn. the family were all busy in the back part of the house, and she had made her way quietly in, hoping to surprise them. one edition of jelly was trickled from pot to pot, another lay upon the floor, and a third was burning gaily on the stove. i know he did, though he didn’t say so, and one man called me ‘a doll’. moffat was a fat, jolly old gentleman, who knew her father, and mrs. “yes, marmee, do you want anything in town? i’ve got to run in and get some paper,” returned jo, pulling out the bow under her chin before the glass as an excuse for not looking at her mother. “while i dress, do you drill her, nan, in the management of her skirt and those french heels, or she will trip herself up. “it’s so early! you can’t mean to go yet?” began jo, looking relieved but hesitating to accept the offer. “i’ll never tell him to my dying day, wild horses shan’t drag it out of me, so you’ll forgive me, meg, and i’ll do anything to show how out-and-out sorry i am,” he added, looking very much ashamed of himself. bhaer and jo were enjoying promenades of a different sort, along muddy roads and sodden fields. out, therefore it came, and with it many necessary links in the story. mother says he’s very nice, though he never speaks to us girls. god winds you up, and you go till he stops you. she answered him with a smile, and they went on together in the most amicable manner. he is so good to me, how can i help it? but he could never be anything to me but my brother. no hint of this had reached the culprits, however, and amy’s dismay can be imagined, when, the very evening before the fair, as she was putting the last touches to her pretty table, mrs. so, come and ’fess, teddy. “well, i like to hear about cricket and boating and hunting,” said frank, who had not yet learned to suit his amusements to his strength. ” “my head aches and i’m tired, so i thought maybe some of you would go,” said beth. ” “he’s a true john bull. “no, winking isn’t ladylike. a prouder young woman was seldom seen than she, when, having composed herself, she electrified the family by appearing before them with the letter in one hand, the check in the other, announcing that she had won the prize. “well, yes, but isn’t it rather warm for such a long walk?” he answered slowly, for the shaded salon looked inviting after the glare without. “it’s a useful thing to have in the house in case of fire or thieves,” observed laurie, as a watchman’s rattle appeared, amid the laughter of the girls. nobody did, however, and nobody saw beth wipe the tears off the yellow keys, that wouldn’t keep in tune, when she was all alone. ” “and you?” “i’m always glad to see you, sir. ” and off she bustled, leaving me to settle myself in my new nest. i’m roving about so, it’s impossible to be regular, you know. jo lay long awake that night, and was just dropping off when the sound of a stifled sob made her fly to beth’s bedside, with the anxious inquiry, “what is it, dear?” “i thought you were asleep,” sobbed beth. moffat reply to one of them. miss kate decided that she was ‘odd’, but rather clever, and smiled upon her from afar. ” and jo’s eyes went slowly round the room, brightening as they looked, for the prospect was a pleasant one. the palais royale is a heavenly place, so full of _bijouterie_ and lovely things that i’m nearly distracted because i can’t buy them. your sincere friend and servant, james laurence chapter seventeen little faithful for a week the amount of virtue in the old house would have supplied the neighborhood. “we shall never know any peace till that child learns to go to bed properly. “no, you didn’t, you knew perfectly well i never cared for anyone but jo,” laurie said that in his old, impetuous tone, and turned his face away as he spoke. “it was altogether abominable, and i don’t deserve to be spoken to for a month, but you will, though, won’t you?” and laurie folded his hands together with such and imploring gesture, as he spoke in his irresistibly persuasive tone, that it was impossible to frown upon him in spite of his scandalous behavior. the good-natured mrs. in this one little was said of the hardships endured, the dangers faced, or the homesickness conquered. this has been such a one, but it ends well, after all. no boys allowed here. if so again, call at me and i come,” he said, with a threatening frown that delighted the little wretches. 1. we are willing to work and we mean to wait. “thou shouldst save some for the little friend. the german gentlemen embroider, i know, but darning hose is another thing and not so pretty. “of course he had. “jo, dear, don’t hope any more. i wasn’t sure, no one said anything, and i hoped i was mistaken. ” “do say some! i can read it, but can’t pronounce. her little jealous fear vanished forever, and she thanked him, with a face full of love and confidence. she could only sob out, “i try to be willing,” while she held fast to jo, as the first bitter wave of this great sorrow broke over them together. kirke asked me if i wouldn’t go down to the five o’clock dinner, and feeling a little bit homesick, i thought i would, just to see what sort of people are under the same roof with me. ” jo’s only answer was to hold her mother close, and in the silence which followed the sincerest prayer she had ever prayed left her heart without words. ” “i did once, but i can never hunt again, for i got hurt leaping a confounded five-barred gate, so there are no more horses and hounds for me,” said frank with a sigh that made beth hate herself for her innocent blunder. i want to be great, or nothing. you have grown abominably lazy, you like gossip, and waste time on frivolous things, you are contented to be petted and admired by silly people, instead of being loved and respected by wise ones. i’m happy as i am, and love my liberty too well to be in a hurry to give it up for any mortal man. “yes, but you won’t do it,” answered laurie, who wished to make up, but felt that his outraged dignity must be appeased first. “you said, mother, that criticism would help me. i’ll go to washington and see brooke. ” said jo, strolling along with her hands behind her, partly from habit, partly to conceal the bespattered parasol. ” “i am glad of that!” exclaimed meg. “it’s no use! do the best you can when the time comes, and if the audience laughs, don’t blame me. e. jo laughed noiselessly all through the hall, but amy looked disgusted at the failure of her instructions, and very naturally laid the blame upon jo. i’ll do my part, and have nothing to reproach myself with,” and stooping down, she softly kissed her husband on the forehead. a year seems very long to wait before i see them, but remind them that while we wait we may all work, so that these hard days need not be wasted. her anger had a good effect, however, for she hid it under a smiling face, and seemed unusually blithe and brilliant. laurence struck while the iron was hot, and before the blighted being recovered spirit enough to rebel, they were off. “oh sir, they do care, very very much!” “are you the musical girl?” he asked, without any startling “hey!” as he looked down at her very kindly. dashwood. “we must have our sing, in the good old way, for we are all together again once more,” said jo, feeling that a good shout would be a safe and pleasant vent for the jubilant emotions of her soul. after that, the little brown hood slipped through the hedge nearly every day, and the great drawing room was haunted by a tuneful spirit that came and went unseen. ” “have you asked her about it?” “i have tried once or twice, but she either evaded my questions or looked so distressed that i stopped. ” “i will try, mother, i truly will. ” by the second week, everyone knew perfectly well what was going on, yet everyone tried to look as if they were stone-blind to the changes in jo’s face. if you’d only set about another task of some sort, you’d soon be your hearty, happy self again, and forget your trouble. ” “no, indeed! it’s past nine, and dark as egypt. oh, marmee, i do try! i will keep on trying, and not get tired, since i have you to help me. this is as you were. i wish we could wash from our hearts and souls the stains of the week away, and let water and air by their magic make ourselves as pure as they. “rather!” “well, in a year or two i’ll send for you, and we’ll dig in the forum for relics, and carry out all the plans we’ve made so many times. “laugh? not one! they sat still as mice, and susie cried quarts, i know she did. i’m far from it now, but i do my best, and hope in time to be what mother is. as long as _the spread eagle_ paid her a dollar a column for her ‘rubbish’, as she called it, jo felt herself a woman of means, and spun her little romances diligently. “may they haf oranges and figs?” asked mr. to rescue the conversation from one of the wells of silence into which it kept falling, jo said hastily, “now you must have a good long holiday!” “i intend to. beth and amy soon fell asleep in spite of the great trouble, but meg lay awake, thinking the most serious thoughts she had ever known in her short life. the children went to him like bees to a honeypot, and establishing themselves on each knee, proceeded to captivate him by rifling his pockets, pulling his beard, and investigating his watch, with juvenile audacity. “shut your eyes and hold out your arms,” she said invitingly. so let’s forget it, and talk about the _rambler_ or something pleasant. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of the project gutenberg™ trademark. ” “so you are, my dear, and i should have made you mine, only i fancied it might pain you to learn that your teddy loved someone else. write something for us, and never mind the rest of the world. everything appeared to feel the hopeful change. she soon became interested in her work, for her emaciated purse grew stout, and the little hoard she was making to take beth to the mountains next summer grew slowly but surely as the weeks passed. “send beth and mother to the seaside for a month or two,” answered jo promptly. ” chapter fourteen secrets jo was very busy in the garret, for the october days began to grow chilly, and the afternoons were short. come in, and make one of us. at the door her sisters seized and bore her to the parlor in a triumphal procession, all pointing and all saying at once, “look there! look there!” beth did look, and turned pale with delight and surprise, for there stood a little cabinet piano, with a letter lying on the glossy lid, directed like a sign board to “miss elizabeth march. i asked him to help me so, and he never forgot it, but saved me from many a sharp word by that little gesture and kind look. thank you very, very much!” meg spoke earnestly, and forgot herself entirely till something in the brown eyes looking down at her made her remember the cooling tea, and lead the way into the parlor, saying she would call her mother. so she took amy by the hand, and taught her as she herself had been taught sixty years ago, a process which carried dismay to amy’s soul, and made her feel like a fly in the web of a very strict spider. i’ve tried, because one feels awkward in company not to do as everybody else is doing, but i don’t seem to get on”, said jo, forgetting to play mentor. don’t i always tell you everything? i was ashamed to speak of it before the younger children, but i want you to know all the dreadful things i did at the moffats’. the old gentleman knew that perfectly well, and particularly desired to prevent it, for the mood in which he found his grandson assured him that it would not be wise to leave him to his own devices. if the stranger had any doubts about his reception, they were set at rest in a minute by the cordial welcome he received. congratulating himself that a handsome repast had been ordered that morning, feeling sure that it would be ready to the minute, and indulging in pleasant anticipations of the charming effect it would produce, when his pretty wife came running out to meet him, he escorted his friend to his mansion, with the irrepressible satisfaction of a young host and husband. “now, jo, do you think i’d look your mother in the face and say ‘all right’, if it wasn’t?” and laurie stopped short, with an injured air. carrol, as amy sat down beside her with the confiding air elderly people like so well in the young. wear your ring, dear, and do your best. “not a first attempt, i take it?” observing that the pages were numbered, covered only on one side, and not tied up with a ribbon—sure sign of a novice. but jo only turned over the traitorous pillow, and answered, in a tone which she tried to make more cheerful, “no, i had father and mother to help me, and the dear babies to comfort me, and the thought that you and amy were safe and happy, to make the troubles here easier to bear. chester asked me if i would, and i offered to tend a table, as i have nothing but my time to give. malaprop, and sailed in with a mask on. if there was anyone left to stay with the old gentleman, i’d do it tomorrow. each and all were answered by a smile, a bow, and a demure “yes” or “no” with the chill on. that rosy cheeks don’t last forever, that silver threads will come in the bonnie brown hair, and that, by-and-by, kindness and respect will be as sweet as love and admiration now. “she could not think it he,” and lay staring up at him in startled silence, till he stooped and kissed her. “give them all of my dear love and a kiss. presently she laughed and showed him a small sketch of jo in her scribbling suit, with the bow rampantly erect upon her cap, and issuing from her mouth the words, ‘genius burns!’. sometimes her family were invited in to help eat up a too bounteous feast of successes, or lotty would be privately dispatched with a batch of failures, which were to be concealed from all eyes in the convenient stomachs of the little hummels. ” meg and amy were contrary-minded, and mr. “what are you going to do with yourselves after you get settled?” asked jo, buttoning amy’s cloak as she used to button her pinafores. i’d better burn the house down, i suppose, than let other people blow themselves up with my gunpowder,” she thought as she watched the demon of the jura whisk away, a little black cinder with fiery eyes. he bore it as long as he could, then went to his piano and began to play. “i have neither, and very few friends to care whether i live or die,” said mr. it was very pretty then, but to me it is much prettier now, for in this seeming blemishes i read a little history. i came to see if you could care for it, and i waited to be sure that i was something more than a friend. mercy me, how time does fly!” “as one of the children is older than yourself, you needn’t talk so like a grandma. pickwick put on a pair of spectacles without any glass, rapped upon the table, hemmed, and having stared hard at mr. ” “go and do something splendid that will make her love you. ” “if it was fair, that was in the bond, and i stand to the letter of my bond, shylock. it was certainly proposing under difficulties, for even if he had desired to do so, mr. laurence and his grandson dined with them, also mr. she had a decided mouth, a comical nose, and sharp, gray eyes, which appeared to see everything, and were by turns fierce, funny, or thoughtful. precious and helpful hours to jo, for now her heart received the teaching that it needed. “children, i leave you to hannah’s care and mr. the purpose which now took possession of her was a natural one to a poor and ambitious girl, but the means she took to gain her end were not the best. “that’s loving our neighbor better than ourselves, and i like it,” said meg, as they set out their presents while their mother was upstairs collecting clothes for the poor hummels. the girls is clever and fly round right smart. she explained and then asked anxiously, “what about beth?” “i’m sorry i spoke, but as i did, i’ll tell you. when he looked about him for another and a less intractable damsel to immortalize in melody, memory produced one with the most obliging readiness. but the training she received at aunt march’s was just what she needed, and the thought that she was doing something to support herself made her happy in spite of the perpetual “josy-phine!” beth was too bashful to go to school. though laurie flirted with amy and joked with jo, his manner to beth had always been peculiarly kind and gentle, but so was everybody’s. “then i shall come home and teach drawing for my living,” replied the aspirant for fame, with philosophic composure. so after idling away an hour, they drove home again, and having paid his respects to mrs. “not being a genius, like keats, it won’t kill me,” she said stoutly, “and i’ve got the joke on my side, after all, for the parts that were taken straight out of real life are denounced as impossible and absurd, and the scenes that i made up out of my own silly head are pronounced ‘charmingly natural, tender, and true’. i don’t know how you do it, but you are a born wheedler. “yes, that’s beth. “young ladies, you remember what i said to you a week ago. ” and jo took heart again, for that salutation could not be called lover-like. march proudly escorted mrs. donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. “i don’t like favors, they oppress and make me feel like a slave. “of course i shall! i give you my word i won’t laugh. “you are sure there are no more?” “i never lie, sir. and now having disposed of my most valuable property i hope all will be satisfied and not blame the dead. march received her repast with thanks and laughed heartily over it after jo was gone. now she rides anything, for she doesn’t know what fear is, and the stableman lets her have horses cheap because she trains them to carry ladies so well. ” “no, she’s not to be bothered with me, but you like that sort of thing, unless you’ve suddenly lost your taste for it. i want to be kind, but i know i shall get angry if you abuse my professor. i’m not so good as you make me, but i have tried to do right. “‘i have had many pairs of slippers in my life, but i never had any that suited me so well as yours,’” continues jo. “you shall all go and help me, and when we come back we will have bread and milk for breakfast, and make it up at dinnertime. she bore it very well, and quietly submitted to the family decree that she should not shorten her visit, for since it was too late to say goodbye to beth, she had better stay, and let absence soften her sorrow. 3, the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. “don’t, jo. it’s honest work, and i’m not ashamed of it. march saw something on the lifted hand that made her smile. but over-strained eyes caused pen and ink to be laid aside for a bold attempt at poker-sketching. when she had heard the explanation of the quoted phrases, mrs. i’m to be a famous musician myself, and all creation is to rush to hear me. john saw in a minute that a revolution of some kind was going on, but wisely asked no questions, knowing that meg was such a transparent little person, she couldn’t keep a secret to save her life, and therefore the clue would soon appear. she is not hurt, and won’t even take cold, i think, you were so sensible in covering and getting her home quickly,” replied her mother cheerfully. to be loved and chosen by a good man is the best and sweetest thing which can happen to a woman, and i sincerely hope my girls may know this beautiful experience. if she had seen his face when, safe in his own room, he looked at the picture of a severe and rigid young lady, with a good deal of hair, who appeared to be gazing darkly into futurity, it might have thrown some light upon the subject, especially when he turned off the gas, and kissed the picture in the dark. but the letter telling that beth was failing never reached amy, and when the next found her the grass was green above her sister. march’s chair with the affectionate look and tone he always gave her. ” “oh, jo, it’s not so bad as that?” cried laurie, with a startled face. ” laurie bent, and whispered three words in jo’s ear, which produced a comical change. amy curtis march dear mis march, i jes drop a line to say we git on fust rate. ” mr. “highty-tighty! is that the way you take my advice, miss? you’ll be sorry for it by-and-by, when you’ve tried love in a cottage and found it a failure. before the golden mean was found, however, meg added to her domestic possessions what young couples seldom get on long without, a family jar. it isn’t safe in the middle. “how can you be so cruel to me?” he whispered, under cover of a lively chorus. “she’s right, there’s no time for tears now. ” and laurie put his arm about her with a brotherly gesture which was very comforting. up rose snodgrass, very much in earnest. dashwood’s directions, and making mrs. “‘prunes and prisms’ are my doom, and i may as well make up my mind to it. amy minds me nicely, and i take great care of her. “thank you, i’m afraid i don’t deserve that pretty compliment. fun forever, and no grubbing!” cried jo, rising, glass in hand, as the lemonade went round. what will you do with such a fortune?” asked amy, regarding the magic slip of paper with a reverential eye. it was very splendid, and they have gone to spend the winter in paris. “it’s all the same, you know, she and i being one. to others it might seem a ludicrous or trivial affair, but to her it was a hard experience, for during the twelve years of her life she had been governed by love alone, and a blow of that sort had never touched her before. laurie looked at her a minute as if he did not quite know what to do with himself, then turned sharply away, saying in a desperate sort of tone, “you’ll be sorry some day, jo. march put the question with what the girls called her ‘maria theresa air’. i didn’t beg, borrow, or steal it. i like it very much, and he doesn’t seem tired of it yet, which is very good of him, isn’t it? i mean to give him something on christmas, for i dare not offer money. ” then things went smoothly, for don pedro defied the world in a speech of two pages without a single break. one can imagine what answer he made, how he received his present, and what a blissful state of things ensued. “i should not have chosen that way of mending a fault,” replied her mother, “but i’m not sure that it won’t do you more good than a bolder method. “it’s father’s friend. “why don’t you go yourself?” asked meg. ” “that’s a sociable arrangement,” said amy, missing something in laurie’s manner, though she couldn’t tell what. to beth (if she lives after me) i give my dolls and the little bureau, my fan, my linen collars and my new slippers if she can wear them being thin when she gets well. why, there is ned moffat, i do declare. women always are, and this last year has been such a hard one that i feel forty. poor folks shouldn’t rig,” said jo decidedly. “what a haughty, uninteresting creature that oldest miss march is!” was the unfortunately audible remark of one of the ladies, as the door closed upon their guests. ’ over the door, and said to herself, with a sternly reproachful air. it’s a dull day, but the air isn’t bad, and i’m going to take brooke home, so it will be gay inside, if it isn’t out. jo laughed, meg scolded, beth implored, and amy wailed because she couldn’t remember how much nine times twelve was. i won’t be kept in the dark. now this lady was a thin, yellow spinster, with a sharp nose and inquisitive eyes, who saw everything and gossiped about all she saw. aunt carrol was there, heard the story, looked pleased, and said something to mrs. ” “it is one of her aristocratic tastes, and quite proper, for a real lady is always known by neat boots, gloves, and handkerchief,” replied meg, who had a good many little ‘aristocratic tastes’ of her own. they seemed to get clearer views of life and duty up there among the everlasting hills. “put him in the oven, and maybe he will get warm and revive,” said amy hopefully. she was rather a favorite with ‘old davis’, as, of course, he was called, and it’s my private belief that he would have broken his word if the indignation of one irrepressible young lady had not found vent in a hiss. nothing was neat and pleasant but ‘marmee’s corner’, which looked as usual. ” a loud response from snodgrass, followed, to everybody’s surprise, by a timid one from beth. we both bowed, and then we laughed, for the prim introduction and the blunt addition were rather a comical contrast. by-and-by jo roamed away upstairs, for it was rainy, and she could not walk. there’s a demand for socks just now,” added jo, waving hers like a big blue worsted banner as they parted at the gate. ” “i’ll be agreeable. i’m sorry, but i was so busy,” and meg’s tears began again. she looked round to see how the professor liked it, and found him looking at her with the grimmest expression she had ever seen him wear. “what does the goose mean?” said meg, laughing and trying to look unconscious. “i’m so full of happiness, that if father was only here, i couldn’t hold one drop more,” said beth, quite sighing with contentment as jo carried her off to the study to rest after the excitement, and to refresh herself with some of the delicious grapes the ‘jungfrau’ had sent her. major lincoln asked who ‘the fresh little girl with the beautiful eyes’ was, and mr. all were unconscious that this experience was a test of character, and when the first excitement was over, felt that they had done well and deserved praise. john was a mild man, but he was human, and after a long day’s work to come home tired, hungry, and hopeful, to find a chaotic house, an empty table, and a cross wife was not exactly conducive to repose of mind or manner. ” jo thought intently for a minute with her eyes fixed on the picture, then she smoothed out her wrinkled forehead and said, with a decided nod at the face opposite, “no thank you, sir, you’re very charming, but you’ve no more stability than a weathercock. ” “i agree with you, and if it can be managed you shall go. mr. “good evening, apollo!” she answered, smiling back at him, for he too looked unusually debonair, and the thought of entering the ballroom on the arm of such a personable man caused amy to pity the four plain misses davis from the bottom of her heart. i wish i’d printed the whole or not at all, for i do hate to be so misjudged. lying on the grass at the feet of the two young ladies, mr. the professor charged up and down the green aisles like a stout teutonic knight, with a pole for a lance, leading on the boys, who made a hook and ladder company of themselves, and performed wonders in the way of ground and lofty tumbling. ” “yes, ma’am. aunt march received them with her usual hospitality. the fair was pronounced a success, and when may bade amy goodnight, she did not gush as usual, but gave her an affectionate kiss, and a look which said ‘forgive and forget’. oh, i must tell you what that absurd lennox did! he got his friend ward, who came on with us, to order a bouquet for me, and the first thing i saw in my room was a lovely one, with “robert lennox’s compliments,” on the card. so busy was she with her card full of refractory figures that she did not observe a newcomer, who entered without stopping the vehicle, till a masculine voice said, “good morning, miss march,” and, looking up, she beheld one of laurie’s most elegant college friends. all walked quietly through the garden, out at the little back gate, and began to climb the hill that lay between the house and river. “jo march, you are perverse enough to provoke a saint! you don’t intend to make calls in that state, i hope,” cried amy, surveying her with amazement. f. ” but the lesson did not go at all for a few minutes because mr. m. her eyes kindled as they turned wistfully toward the window, but they fell on the old house opposite, and she shook her head with sorrowful decision. “may i come in, please? or shall i be a bother?” he asked, advancing slowly. i’ve done what i undertook, and it’s not my fault that it failed. ” “well, i like that? so you keep an account of my good and bad marks in brooke’s face, do you? i see him bow and smile as he passes your window, but i didn’t know you’d got up a telegraph. no persuasions or enticements could overcome her fear, till, the fact coming to mr. “so am i,” added jo, slapping the pocket wherein reposed the long-desired _undine and sintram_. march soothed her by promises of entire silence and great discretion for the future. in america, as everyone knows, girls early sign the declaration of independence, and enjoy their freedom with republican zest, but the young matrons usually abdicate with the first heir to the throne and go into a seclusion almost as close as a french nunnery, though by no means as quiet. keep up your heart, little daughter, and we will soon have you home again. going to college ought to satisfy him, for if i give him four years he ought to let me off from the business. e. from your faithful jo. and no time is so beautiful and precious to parents as the first years of the little lives given to them to train. on new year’s eve the parlor was deserted, for the two younger girls played dressing maids and the two elder were absorbed in the all-important business of ‘getting ready for the party’. king crying and mr. what is it, dear?” “shall i go away?” asked jo discreetly. she took to writing sensation stories, for in those dark ages, even all-perfect america read rubbish. ” “oh, dear!” sighed meg. ” “i’m never angry with you. “i shall have to toil and moil all my days, with only little bits of fun now and then, and get old and ugly and sour, because i’m poor and can’t enjoy my life as other girls do. now we shall have some sensible conversation. john had praised her, and was undoing the old pocketbook which they called the ‘bank’, when meg, knowing that it was quite empty, stopped his hand, saying nervously. the lady was good and lovely and accomplished, but he did not like her, and never saw his son after he married. the snow was light, and with her broom she soon swept a path all round the garden, for beth to walk in when the sun came out and the invalid dolls needed air. i declared i wouldn’t and got mad. bangs came, said beth had symptoms of the fever, but he thought she would have it lightly, though he looked sober over the hummel story. amy said, “everyone seemed waiting for something, and couldn’t settle down, which was queer, since father was safe at home,” and beth innocently wondered why their neighbors didn’t run over as usual. the manuscript was privately dispatched, accompanied by a note, modestly saying that if the tale didn’t get the prize, which the writer hardly dared expect, she would be very glad to receive any sum it might be considered worth. chapter thirteen castles in the air laurie lay luxuriously swinging to and fro in his hammock one warm september afternoon, wondering what his neighbors were about, but too lazy to go and find out. let it pass, and i’ll explain what i can. a weekly meeting will be held at kitchen place, to teach young ladies how to cook. i saw it going into your house as i came by, and if she hadn’t defended it manfully i’d have had a pick at it, for it looked like a remarkably plummy one. we’ll have happy times, for i don’t suffer much, and i think the tide will go out easily, if you help me. “but i lost her when i was a little older than you are, and for years had to struggle on alone, for i was too proud to confess my weakness to anyone else. a smart shower at eleven had evidently quenched the enthusiasm of the young ladies who were to arrive at twelve, for nobody came, and at two the exhausted family sat down in a blaze of sunshine to consume the perishable portions of the feast, that nothing might be lost. “hannah will tell us what to do, and we’ll have everything nice when you come home,” added beth, getting out her mop and dish tub without delay. ” i felt angry at first, and then i didn’t care, for a governess is as good as a clerk, and i’ve got sense, if i haven’t style, which is more than some people have, judging from the remarks of the elegant beings who clattered away, smoking like bad chimneys. jo opened her lips to say something rude, but checked herself in time, colored up to her forehead and stood a minute, hammering down a wicket with all her might, while fred hit the stake and declared himself out with much exultation. she tries very hard, and i know you will be pleased with her improvement when you come. a little gray-coated sand bird came tripping over the beach ‘peeping’ softly to itself, as if enjoying the sun and sea. chapter nine meg goes to vanity fair “i do think it was the most fortunate thing in the world that those children should have the measles just now,” said meg, one april day, as she stood packing the ‘go abroady’ trunk in her room, surrounded by her sisters. “why, you pile up your hands, choose a number, and draw out in turn, and the person who draws at the number has to answer truly any question put by the rest. “hum. “hum!” said jo, with a sigh. “ah! i see him now, it is that imp tina who makes me a fool with my cap. chapter thirty-six beth’s secret when jo came home that spring, she had been struck with the change in beth. the more you love and trust him, the nearer you will feel to him, and the less you will depend on human power and wisdom. i send my duty to mr. but jo had made up her mind, and after pondering over a project for some days, she confided it to her mother. a tower rose to the ceiling, halfway up appeared a window with a lamp burning in it, and behind the white curtain appeared zara in a lovely blue and silver dress, waiting for roderigo. “you precocious chick! who put that into your head?” said jo, enjoying the innocent revelation as much as the professor. meg was already covering the buckwheats, and piling the bread into one big plate. i’ve a special interest in such young bears, and like to show them that i see the warm, honest, well-meaning boys’ hearts, in spite of the clumsy arms and legs and the topsy-turvy heads. scarlet with shame and anger, amy went to and fro six dreadful times, and as each doomed couple, looking oh, so plump and juicy, fell from her reluctant hands, a shout from the street completed the anguish of the girls, for it told them that their feast was being exulted over by the little irish children, who were their sworn foes. “sallie moffat has four,” began amy. i thought perhaps you’d had some news from home. she liked the ‘laurence boy’ better than ever and took several good looks at him, so that she might describe him to the girls, for they had no brothers, very few male cousins, and boys were almost unknown creatures to them. laurence is looking up at the sky and the weathercock. so held, john had waited with a womanly patience till the little hand relaxed its hold, and while waiting had fallen asleep, more tired by that tussle with his son than with his whole day’s work. do your best, and grow as happy as we are in your success. if our young friend studied punctuation, it would be well. ” and so he was, for, as she laughed and talked, jo had whisked things into place and given quite a different air to the room. four little keys hung side by side, with faded ribbons, brave and gay when fastened there, with childish pride, long ago, on a rainy day. ” “i’ll right it up in two minutes, for it only needs to have the hearth brushed, so—and the things made straight on the mantelpiece, so—and the books put here, and the bottles there, and your sofa turned from the light, and the pillows plumped up a bit. so she winked hard, shook her head, and said gruffly because amy was listening, “it was an abominable thing, and she doesn’t deserve to be forgiven. it will please him very much, and be a nice way of thanking him. brooke!” “i thank you, very, very much. 4. the other gentlemen speculated with equal rashness in all sorts of frail trifles, and wandered helplessly about afterward, burdened with wax flowers, painted fans, filigree portfolios, and other useful and appropriate purchases. meg is so, and i am content with her success. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™ license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™. there’s the tea bell, i must run and change my cap. 1 through 1. “i’m a great deal better for it, and ever so much obliged. when she came down, looking like a pretty quakeress in her dove-colored suit and straw bonnet tied with white, they all gathered about her to say ‘good-by’, as tenderly as if she had been going to make the grand tour. she thought it would do her no harm, for she sincerely meant to write nothing of which she would be ashamed, and quieted all pricks of conscience by anticipations of the happy minute when she should show her earnings and laugh over her well-kept secret. when i got back to the nursery there was such an uproar in the parlor that i looked in, and there was mr. ” feeling very much out of sorts herself, jo hurried into the parlor to find beth sobbing over pip, the canary, who lay dead in the cage with his little claws pathetically extended, as if imploring the food for want of which he had died. jo can’t prevent my seeing her, and i shall stay and do it as long as i like,” interrupted laurie in a defiant tone. they all liked jo immensely, but never fell in love with her, though very few escaped without paying the tribute of a sentimental sigh or two at amy’s shrine. then it was that margaret, sitting alone with tears dropping often on her work, felt how rich she had been in things more precious than any luxuries money could buy—in love, protection, peace, and health, the real blessings of life. ” “that’s like her. the moffats were very fashionable, and simple meg was rather daunted, at first, by the splendor of the house and the elegance of its occupants. so the diver hoisted it up, and was much disappointed on opening it to find no pearls. oh, dear!” “never mind, you’ve got the tarlaton for the big party, and you always look like an angel in white,” said amy, brooding over the little store of finery in which her soul delighted. having found the place with some difficulty, she went into the doorway, looked up the dirty stairs, and after standing stock still a minute, suddenly dived into the street and walked away as rapidly as she came. “i’m beth. “they ought to have told me, and not let me go blundering and scolding, when i should have been more kind and patient than ever. my friends find for me a place in a college, where i teach as at home, and earn enough to make the way smooth for franz and emil. her father called her ‘little miss tranquility’, and the name suited her excellently, for she seemed to live in a happy world of her own, only venturing out to meet the few whom she trusted and loved. her mother gave her an extra cordial cup of tea. “you rogue! you traitor! jo, how could you?” cried the three girls, as snodgrass led her friend triumphantly forth, and producing both a chair and a badge, installed him in a jiffy. ” “no, i won’t. my dearest mother: it is impossible to tell you how happy your last letter made us, for the news was so good we couldn’t help laughing and crying over it. i’ll slip off and take a journey somewhere, and when grandpa misses me he’ll come round fast enough. sallie gardiner was absorbed in keeping her white pique dress clean and chattering with the ubiquitous fred, who kept beth in constant terror by his pranks. when i was first married, i used to long for my new clothes to wear out or get torn, so that i might have the pleasure of mending them, for i got heartily sick of doing fancywork and tending my pocket handkerchief. meg likewise resolved to be ‘calm and kind, but firm’, and show him his duty. yet as she scribbled, she kept her eye on her sister, who seemed unusually quiet. laurence came hurrying back with beth, bringing every comfort the kind old gentleman could think of for the invalid, and friendliest promises of protection for the girls during the mother’s absence, which comforted her very much. why everybody liked him was what puzzled jo, at first. march with a look that warmed jo’s heart. i felt a little low in my mind as i sat up in my room after tea, and when the big, muddy, battered-looking bundle was brought to me, i just hugged it and pranced. as i can’t, i’ll merely say that i don’t see any harm in that pleasant little game, if all parties understand that it’s only play. “miss josephine march,” actually printed in the paper. march looked silently at the downcast face of her pretty daughter, and could not find it in her heart to blame her little follies. so the curtain falls upon meg, jo, beth, and amy. e. i’d promised not to tell, and of course i wasn’t going to break my word. meantime you can go to italy, germany, switzerland, where you will, and enjoy pictures, music, scenery, and adventures to your heart’s content. “you oughtn’t to be seen till the last minute, child. wouldn’t that console you?” “i rather think it would, but there’s no knowing what may happen in three years,” said jo thoughtfully. i study as well as play, and as for this”—with a little gesture toward her dress—“why, tulle is cheap, posies to be had for nothing, and i am used to making the most of my poor little things. she never alluded to a certain person, but she thought of him a good deal, dreamed dreams more than ever, and once jo, rummaging her sister’s desk for stamps, found a bit of paper scribbled over with the words, ‘mrs. you are not a dandy, thank heaven, so i’m glad to see there are no diamonds or big seal rings on it, only the little old one jo gave you so long ago. “it seems so long to wait, so hard to do. “think about something pleasant, and you’ll soon drop off. it would be nice, but i wish the beautiful country up there was real, and we could ever go to it,” said beth musingly. i only wished i liked teaching as you do. the work put into it made it dear, and so on. come and kiss me, baby. brooke couldn’t understand why your mother was so kind to him, asking him over with me and treating him in her beautiful friendly way. mrs. march whispered gently, “my dear, don’t let the sun go down upon your anger. the foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the united states. now it occurred to him that she was doing what she was ashamed to own, and it troubled him. as soon as he had gone, she wished she had been more forgiving, and when meg and her mother went upstairs, she felt lonely and longed for teddy. “yes, that’s the best place for such inflammable nonsense. ” “where, where?” shrieks amy, staring out at two tall posts with a crossbeam and some dangling chains. if they don’t see it, you will tell them for me. his letters were such a comfort, for the home letters were very irregular and not half so satisfactory as his when they did come. baron rothschild’s private secretary, a large-nosed jew in tight boots, affably beamed upon the world, as if his master’s name crowned him with a golden halo. tired with her short journey, beth went at once to bed, saying how glad she was to be home, and when jo went down, she found that she would be spared the hard task of telling beth’s secret. i don’t know what’s to become of the dinner, for it’s ready, and there’s no one to eat it. laurie and i couldn’t help laughing. presently, as jo’s sobs quieted, he said hopefully, “i don’t think she will die. ” as the gate clashed behind them, a voice cried from a window. ” “i dare say she’d put them back if you asked her,” suggested someone. but you have got on bravely, and i think the burdens are in a fair way to tumble off very soon,” said mr. it’s simple, but handsome, and those folds over the arm are really artistic. i quite enjoy the idea. “i don’t approve of corporal punishment, especially for girls. i can bear anything better than that. “don’t spoil your book, my girl, for there is more in it than you know, and the idea is well worked out. ” “he did wrong, but we forgave him, and all promised not to say a word to anyone,” began jo reluctantly. she done out a tub of clothes on monday, but she starched ’em afore they was wrenched, and blued a pink calico dress till i thought i should a died a laughin. brooke will go to keep us boys steady, and kate vaughn will play propriety for the girls. if you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1. org/license. jo soon found that her innocent experience had given her but few glimpses of the tragic world which underlies society, so regarding it in a business light, she set about supplying her deficiencies with characteristic energy. much less could he indulge in tender remonstrations in the open street, though he was near it. i don’t want to be worried about such things. ” “is this what made you so unhappy in the autumn, beth? you did not feel it then, and keep it to yourself so long, did you?” asked jo, refusing to see or say that it was best, but glad to know that laurie had no part in beth’s trouble. amy and her pole distinguished themselves by equal enthusiasm but more graceful agility, and laurie found himself involuntarily keeping time to the rhythmic rise and fall of the white slippers as they flew by as indefatigably as if winged. mr. jo’s angles are much softened, she has learned to carry herself with ease, if not grace. you said, ‘who is the young lady in the pretty slippers’, didn’t you?” “oui, mademoiselle. “no more than i expected, if you are allowed to go poking about among poor folks. one of the girls kept laughing affectedly, and saying, “now professor,” in a coquettish tone, and the other pronounced her german with an accent that must have made it hard for him to keep sober. so i made myself respectable and tried to slip in behind mrs. all sorts of pleasant things happened about that time, for the new friendship flourished like grass in spring. “i’m not meg tonight, i’m ‘a doll’ who does all sorts of crazy things. a few days after the talk with her mother, meg resolved to try a social evening with john, so she ordered a nice supper, set the parlor in order, dressed herself prettily, and put the children to bed early, that nothing should interfere with her experiment. “i suppose the others are torn up to rig ships, bandage cut fingers, or make kite tails. “to hear is to obey, but march is fairer far than may,” said little parker, making a frantic effort to be both witty and tender, and getting promptly quenched by laurie, who said. k. but when laurie was gone, and peace prevailed again, the vague anxiety returned and haunted her. then she tied it up with a smart red ribbon, and sat a minute looking at it with a sober, wistful expression, which plainly showed how earnest her work had been. laurie, though decidedly amazed, behaved with great presence of mind. returning from one of mozart’s grand operas, splendidly performed at the royal theatre, he looked over his own, played a few of the best parts, sat staring at the busts of mendelssohn, beethoven, and bach, who stared benignly back again. but where should she go? and burning to lay herself upon the shrine of sisterly devotion, she sat down to settle that point. for two or three hours the sun lay warmly in the high window, showing jo seated on the old sofa, writing busily, with her papers spread out upon a trunk before her, while scrabble, the pet rat, promenaded the beams overhead, accompanied by his oldest son, a fine young fellow, who was evidently very proud of his whiskers. meg will be absorbed and no good to me any more. “‘have you sons in the army?’ i asked, for the note he brought was not to me. i poked again and said, “a little faster,” then off he went, helter-skelter as before, and we resigned ourselves to our fate. c. don’t make any of your abrupt remarks, or do anything odd, will you? just be calm, cool, and quiet, that’s safe and ladylike, and you can easily do it for fifteen minutes,” said amy, as they approached the first place, having borrowed the white parasol and been inspected by meg, with a baby on each arm. brooke, looking cheerful again, but before he could finish his speech, ned, mounted on the old horse, came lumbering up to display his equestrian skill before the young ladies, and there was no more quiet that day. ” “don’t try too many messes, jo, for you can’t make anything but gingerbread and molasses candy fit to eat. the old gentleman softly stroked the hair off her forehead, and, stooping down, he kissed her, saying, in a tone few people ever heard. fortunately, mr. here’s the money. ” “how i wish i was going to college! you don’t look as if you liked it. but someone did pass, and who should it be but meg, looking particularly ladylike in her state and festival suit, for she had been making calls. ” “that’s impossible. laurence gave her a sharp look, and put on his spectacles, saying slowly, “you’re a sly puss, but i don’t mind being managed by you and beth. she assumed an injured air as they came in, never lifted her eyes from her book, or asked a single question. to her mother’s inquiries she answered that she was quite well, and jo’s she silenced by begging to be let alone. no one knew me, for i disguised my voice, and no one dreamed of the silent, haughty miss march (for they think i am very stiff and cool, most of them, and so i am to whippersnappers) could dance and dress, and burst out into a ‘nice derangement of epitaphs, like an allegory on the banks of the nile’. tell her to make it short and spicy, and never mind the moral. flo’s saving up for tonight. “what is your greatest fault?” asked fred, by way of testing in her the virtue he lacked himself. “i know what i mean, and you needn’t be statirical about it. laurie was equally impracticable, and would have had bonfires, skyrockets, and triumphal arches, if he had had his own way. “why, if you please?” “because, with every chance for being good, useful, and happy, you are faulty, lazy, and miserable. “you know you have—you can’t hide anything, so up and ’fess, or i won’t tell,” cried laurie. with money, talent, position, health, and beauty, ah you like that old vanity! but it’s the truth, so i can’t help saying it, with all these splendid things to use and enjoy, you can find nothing to do but dawdle, and instead of being the man you ought to be, you are only. ” the hard, bitter look came back again as he said that, and it troubled amy, for she did not know what balm to apply. after resisting for some time, she yielded to the impulse, and armed with a book to return, went over to the big house. could swim like a duck, paddled round the castle till he came to a little door guarded by two stout fellows, knocked their heads together till they cracked like a couple of nuts, then, by a trifling exertion of his prodigious strength, he smashed in the door, went up a pair of stone steps covered with dust a foot thick, toads as big as your fist, and spiders that would frighten you into hysterics, miss march. beth is the best of little creeters, and a sight of help to me, bein so forehanded and dependable. don’t blame john till you see where you are wrong yourself. don’t cry so bitterly, but remember this day, and resolve with all your soul that you will never know another like it. kirke is your friend—the kindest soul that ever lived—and would make things pleasant for me, i know. i tried to warm its feet, and lotty gave it some milk, but it didn’t stir, and i knew it was dead. that was a very happy breakfast, though they didn’t get any of it. “disgusted, i dare say, and gone home as suddenly as he came. you gave him a cool nod, and just now you bowed and smiled in the politest way to tommy chamberlain, whose father keeps a grocery store. the ‘haughty, uninteresting creature’ was let severely alone, but amy’s talent and taste were duly complimented by the offer of the art table, and she exerted herself to prepare and secure appropriate and valuable contributions to it. “i don’t think it’s fair for some girls to have plenty of pretty things, and other girls nothing at all,” added little amy, with an injured sniff. “didn’t hayes give you the best out of our gardens? i told him to. ” and beth leaned her head against her sister with a contented look, which effectually settled that point. ” “we are prepared,” said mrs. “don’t trouble yourself. dashwoods’s editorial gravity relaxed into a smile, for jo had forgotten her ‘friend’, and spoken as only an author could. “why, i left a pair over there, and here is only one,” said meg, looking at the gray cotton glove. being a little shortsighted, mr. the remodeled lunch being gaily partaken of, the studio and garden visited, and art discussed with enthusiasm, amy ordered a buggy (alas for the elegant cherry-bounce), and drove her friend quietly about the neighborhood till sunset, when ‘the party went out’. “i have been every day, but the baby is sick, and i don’t know what to do for it. “prut! we will make the time, and we fail not to find the sense. ’ in different colors on each, and the weekly newspaper called, the pickwick portfolio, to which all contributed something, while jo, who reveled in pens and ink, was the editor. ” as she spoke, amy showed the handsome flask which replaced the cheap one, and looked so earnest and humble in her little effort to forget herself that meg hugged her on the spot, and jo pronounced her ‘a trump’, while beth ran to the window, and picked her finest rose to ornament the stately bottle. presently a bell sounded, the curtains flew apart, and the _operatic tragedy_ began. for mr. ” “now, mother, did you really think i could be so silly and selfish, after i’d refused his love, when it was freshest, if not best?” “i knew you were sincere then, jo, but lately i have thought that if he came back, and asked again, you might perhaps, feel like giving another answer. ” jo rather prided herself upon her shopping capabilities, and particularly wished to impress her escort with the neatness and dispatch with which she would accomplish the business. now then, you’re fixed. laurie dashed downstairs for water, while meg and hannah supported her, and jo read aloud, in a frightened voice. org. beth is too feeble and amy too young to depend upon, but when the tug comes, you are always ready. they are made pleasant to some, but i would more rather give my boys gunpowder to play with than this bad trash. jo heard amy panting after her run, stamping her feet and blowing on her fingers as she tried to put her skates on, but jo never turned and went slowly zigzagging down the river, taking a bitter, unhappy sort of satisfaction in her sister’s troubles. good-by, dear, do come and see us. i knew you’d laugh at them, but i couldn’t refuse, she was so anxious to do something. i’m so silly that i liked to think no one knew, and while i was deciding what to say, i felt like the girls in books, who have such things to do. her turn came next. for a small thing it was a great success, and jo was more astonished than when her novel was commended and condemned all at once. i’m nowhere beside you, for belle has heaps of taste, and you’re quite french, i assure you. “i am satisfied. love covers a multitude of sins, and of whom could you ask more freely than of him? try it, and see if he doesn’t find your society far more agreeable than mrs. moffat would wonder at your want of management, if she knew, and how she will rejoice that annie may still hope. everyone was too busy with their own affairs to help her, and the little girls were only hindrances, for the dears fussed and chattered like so many magpies, making a great deal of confusion in their artless efforts to preserve the most perfect order. as he couldn’t, jo wiped his eyes for him, and said, laughing, as she took away a bundle or two. mr. ” mr. ” “snuffbox,” said jo, in a sepulchral tone, which convulsed the audience. l. her father liked the metaphysical streak which had unconsciously got into it, so that was allowed to remain though she had her doubts about it. next day she put her pride in her pocket, went to sallie, told the truth, and asked her to buy the silk as a favor. all in a minute various hints and trifles assumed shape and significance in amy’s mind, and told her what her sister never had confided to her. when i mentioned it to mrs. i’m sure you feel this. s. “the note is from mother, and the flowers from laurie,” said meg simply, yet much gratified that he had not forgotten her. if you always spent money in that way, no one would blame you,” said jo warmly. ” “well, i did it to please amy,” began laurie, with a twinkle that made jo exclaim. fifteen minutes after aunt march’s departure, jo came softly downstairs, paused an instant at the parlor door, and hearing no sound within, nodded and smiled with a satisfied expression, saying to herself, “she has seen him away as we planned, and that affair is settled. it’s not much changed,” he answered without enthusiasm. he’s very kind, though he does not look so, and he lets me do what i like, pretty much, only he’s afraid i might be a bother to strangers,” began laurie, brightening more and more. ” and he glanced up with a decided expression of interest in his eyes. here it is, and we never can thank you enough for the patient sowing and reaping you have done,” cried jo, with the loving impetuosity which she never would outgrow. aunt march took no notice, but went on with her lecture. a formal apology will make him see how foolish he is, and bring him down quite amiable. now it’s spoiled. ” “yes, mother. women never should marry for money. it lasted all day. ned, frank, and the little girls joined in this, and while it went on, the three elders sat apart, talking. you and i will read these pleasant little _marchen_ together, and dig no more in that dry book, that goes in the corner for making us trouble. kirke’s private parlor, and the two little girls are pretty children, rather spoiled, i fancy, but they took to me after telling them the seven bad pigs, and i’ve no doubt i shall make a model governess. the knowledge that her mother had a fault like hers, and tried to mend it, made her own easier to bear and strengthened her resolution to cure it, though forty years seemed rather a long time to watch and pray to a girl of fifteen. “i’ve got the key to my castle in the air, but whether i can unlock the door remains to be seen,” observed jo mysteriously. ” “i never cry unless for some great affliction. what dreadful thing will you do next?” and jo fell into her seat with a gasp. laurence. but demi corners her by the cool reply. out in the garden stood a stately snow maiden, crowned with holly, bearing a basket of fruit and flowers in one hand, a great roll of music in the other, a perfect rainbow of an afghan round her chilly shoulders, and a christmas carol issuing from her lips on a pink paper streamer. then he amused her for an hour, and was much interested in all her trials. she thought it was of no great value, but, being appropriate, she borrowed it, well knowing that madame would never know it, nor care if she did. “i don’t like fuss and feathers. four little chests all in a row, dim with dust, and worn by time, four women, taught by weal and woe to love and labor in their prime. ” “don’t praise me, meg, for i could box his ears this minute. i am here. it seemed asleep, but all of a sudden if gave a little cry and trembled, and then lay very still. on the table she laid her little testament and hymnbook, kept a vase always full of the best flowers laurie brought her, and came every day to ‘sit alone’ thinking good thoughts, and praying the dear god to preserve her sister. elizabeth, or beth, as everyone called her, was a rosy, smooth-haired, bright-eyed girl of thirteen, with a shy manner, a timid voice, and a peaceful expression which was seldom disturbed. ‘never! till you tell me how i may rescue you,’ swore the knight, still kneeling. ” “i’m not! and if turning up my hair makes me one, i’ll wear it in two tails till i’m twenty,” cried jo, pulling off her net, and shaking down a chestnut mane. if amy had been here, she’d have turned her back on him forever because, sad to relate, he had a great appetite, and shoveled in his dinner in a manner which would have horrified ‘her ladyship’. “of course i shall. i like to pay my debts, so i know you will allow ‘the old gentleman’ to send you something which once belonged to the little grand daughter he lost. “i’m afraid they mightn’t like it,” began laurie, with unusual timidity in such matters. there is a fresh color in her brown cheeks, a soft shine in her eyes, and only gentle words fall from her sharp tongue today. march would not hear of the old gentleman’s undertaking the long journey, yet an expression of relief was visible when he spoke of it, for anxiety ill fits one for traveling. ” they were in the grove now, close by the stile, and when the last words fell reluctantly from jo’s lips, laurie dropped her hands and turned as if to go on, but for once in his life the fence was too much for him. jo often watched him, trying to discover the charm, and at last decided that it was benevolence which worked the miracle. “i’ve made such quantities it would be hard to choose which i’d have,” said laurie, lying flat and throwing cones at the squirrel who had betrayed him. it was late, and she was tired. act fifth opened with a stormy scene between zara and don pedro. “serves me right for trying to be fine. i don’t care what people say!” cried jo, taking up her book. “some handkerchiefs, all hemmed,” said beth. “what can you expect, when you take one’s breath away, creeping in like a burglar, and letting cats out of bags like that? get up, you ridiculous boy, and tell me all about it. ” john laughed, and watched her for a minute, as she poised a pretty little preparation of lace and flowers on her hand, and regarded it with the genuine interest which his harangue had failed to waken. he knew that jo wrote, and had met her down among the newspaper offices more than once, but as she never spoke of it, he asked no questions in spite of a strong desire to see her work. hannah wisely allowed them to relieve their feelings, and when the shower showed signs of clearing up, she came to the rescue, armed with a coffeepot. almost before she knew where she was, jo found herself married and settled at plumfield. king that i can’t come. “i wish i had no heart, it aches so,” sighed meg, after a pause. i laid in a stock, but shall get my gloves in paris. i am angry nearly every day of my life, jo, but i have learned not to show it, and i still hope to learn not to feel it, though it may take me another forty years to do so. “mercy on us! what has happened?” cried jo, staring about her in dismay. ” though possessed of half a dozen hats, it took him some time to find one, then there was a hunt for the key, which was at last discovered in his pocket, so that the girls were quite out of sight when he leaped the fence and ran after them. you don’t object, i hope?” never mind what john said, or what a very narrow escape the little bonnet had from utter ruin. ” “yes, mother, and when i go home i mean to have a corner in the big closet to put my books and the copy of that picture which i’ve tried to make. mrs. ” jo put her hand in his as he said that, and laurie gently smoothed the little red pillow, which he remembered well. when she went again, mr. “you haf a fine day to make your walk. she didn’t want laurie to think her a heartless, worldly creature. ” “i wanted to save you this. when she sings, the songs are always sad ones, and now and then i see a look in her face that i don’t understand. some poor creeter came a-beggin’, and your ma went straight off to see what was needed. mrs. he never spoke of himself, and in a conversation with miss norton divulged the pleasing fact. she beckoned, and jo reluctantly followed her into a side room, where she found her on a sofa, holding her foot, and looking pale. poor meg had a restless night, and got up heavy-eyed, unhappy, half resentful toward her friends, and half ashamed of herself for not speaking out frankly and setting everything right. laurence opened his study door to hear the old-fashioned airs he liked. adieu, i send heaps of love to papa. “well, little girl, what is it?” replied her mother, in whose eyes the stately young lady still remained ‘the baby’. but he got no chance to deliver it, for meg kept away from him till he came to say good night. “what would meg say to this?” thought jo, as she was marched away, while her eyes danced with fun as she imagined herself telling the story at home. a pleasant green field, with three wide-spreading oaks in the middle and a smooth strip of turf for croquet. i don’t like ned and his set, and wish you’d keep out of it. it rolled a bit, perhaps, but that is allowed. “that boy is suffering for society and fun,” she said to herself. ” “put one in mine then, that i wish all my curls cut off, and given round to my friends. ” a pause—then flo cried out, “bless me, there’s a gallows and a man going up. “i’m going out to get some little matters for my girls. “i do think _the witches curse, an operatic tragedy_ is rather a nice thing, but i’d like to try _macbeth_, if we only had a trapdoor for banquo. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg: 1. “why?” asked meg kindly, for jo had gone off in another laugh at amy’s second blunder. ” as she spoke, mrs. ” they found aunt carrol with the old lady, both absorbed in some very interesting subject, but they dropped it as the girls came in, with a conscious look which betrayed that they had been talking about their nieces. e. “go to bed and don’t talk, for we must be up early and shall need all the sleep we can get. ” jo spoke hopefully, but could not rid herself of the foreboding fear that this ‘little trial’ would be harder than the others, and that laurie would not get over his ‘lovelornity’ as easily as heretofore. 1. “he’ll laugh,” said amy warningly. march had tried to thank her children, and broken down, while teddy wiped her eyes on his pinafore, the professor suddenly began to sing. ” “i detest rude, unladylike girls!” “i hate affected, niminy-piminy chits!” “birds in their little nests agree,” sang beth, the peacemaker, with such a funny face that both sharp voices softened to a laugh, and the “pecking” ended for that time. ” “may we, mother?” asked meg, turning to mrs. laurence went on with an odd little nod and smile. fifteen-year-old jo was very tall, thin, and brown, and reminded one of a colt, for she never seemed to know what to do with her long limbs, which were very much in her way. your head is all i could ask, for that white bonnet with the rose is quite ravishing. then, if she was going to meg’s he always had something for the babies. brooke, meg, and ned declined, but fred, sallie, jo, and laurie piled and drew, and the lot fell to laurie. i’m cross and have been out of sorts all day. o. they would have been still more amazed if they had seen what beth did afterward. but there are many little ways in which i can influence him without a word, and i say we ought to do it to others if we can. laurie screwed up his face and obeyed with a gingerly peck at each little cheek that produced another laugh, and made the babies squeal. she was tired of care and confinement, longed for change, and thoughts of her father blended temptingly with the novel charms of camps and hospitals, liberty and fun. another says, ‘it’s one of the best american novels which has appeared for years. but in spite of these unromantic facts, i have nothing to complain of, and never was so jolly in my life. some good angel inspired me to try gymnastics, and i kept it up till they were glad to sit down and keep still. she is the sort of woman who knows how to rule well. you are rather too kind sometimes, and then just a trifle hasty when he tries your patience. the flower table is always attractive, you know, ‘especially to gentlemen’. ” “but he’ll cry himself sick,” pleaded meg, reproaching herself for deserting her boy. i always spoil everything. simple sermons, that went straight to the souls of those who listened, for the father’s heart was in the minister’s religion, and the frequent falter in the voice gave a double eloquence to the words he spoke or read. “this man says, ‘an exquisite book, full of truth, beauty, and earnestness. it pays for you to be fine. i’ll get myself up regardless of expense tomorrow and be a satisfaction to my friends. it so happened that she could not have done a better thing, for laurie came in so quietly she did not hear him, and as she stood at the distant window, with her head half turned and one hand gathering up her dress, the slender, white figure against the red curtains was as effective as a well-placed statue. ” and aunt carrol to reply decidedly, “i certainly will, if her father and mother consent. “a flock of our fellows are going to drive over by-and-by, and i’ll be hanged if i don’t make them buy every flower she’s got, and camp down before her table afterward,” said laurie, espousing her cause with warmth. “it isn’t a mere pleasure trip to me, girls,” she said impressively, as she scraped her best palette. e. i had a young friend who set up housekeeping with six sheets, but she had finger bowls for company and that satisfied her,” said mrs. but when they sat together in the twilight, the time they used to enjoy so much, it was hard work for the old man to ramble on as usual, and harder still for the young one to listen to praises of the last year’s success, which to him now seemed like love’s labor lost. “i don’t believe you are!” exclaimed the boy, looking at her with much admiration, though he privately thought she would have good reason to be a trifle afraid of the old gentleman, if she met him in some of his moods. ” “so did i. “let us do it,” said meg thoughtfully. mr. the horses are splendid, and the men, especially the grooms, ride well, but the women are stiff, and bounce, which isn’t according to our rules. he shook his head. that was a nice little speech about the medicine mother sent him. “yes, dear. what name would your friend like to put on it?” in a careless tone. pride forbid, and whenever the longing grew very strong, he fortified his resolution by repeating the words that had made the deepest impression—“i despise you. such work is healthy, isn’t it, sir? then fritz could train and teach in his own way, and father will help him. “what makes my legs go, dranpa?” asked the young philosopher, surveying those active portions of his frame with a meditative air, while resting after a go-to-bed frolic one night. laurence, keeping hold of the young man, as if fearful that he would break away as his father had done before him. “no, i’m sure i can’t. you don’t look festive, ma’am, what’s the matter?” asked laurie, following her into a corner of the parlor, whither all had adjourned to greet mr. i only mean to say that i have a feeling that it never was intended i should live long. it was a pleasant winter and a long one, for she did not leave mrs. i couldn’t seem to imagine myself anything but stupid little beth, trotting about at home, of no use anywhere but there. no pins were ever stuck into their cotton vitals, no harsh words or blows were ever given them, no neglect ever saddened the heart of the most repulsive, but all were fed and clothed, nursed and caressed with an affection which never failed. so you must try to be contented with making your name boyish, and playing brother to us girls,” said beth, stroking the rough head with a hand that all the dish washing and dusting in the world could not make ungentle in its touch. the pretty, modest girls are never talked about, except respectfully, among gentleman. this is just the time, meg, when young married people are apt to grow apart, and the very time when they ought to be most together, for the first tenderness soon wears off, unless care is taken to preserve it. i like old sam so well, i think i’ll try the second volume,” returned jo, hoping to propitiate him by accepting a second dose of boswell’s johnson, as he had recommended that lively work. money doesn’t stay in his pocket long enough to lay up any. ” “i hate to have odd gloves! never mind, the other may be found. i do wonder if any of us will ever get our wishes,” said laurie, chewing grass like a meditative calf. at the word ‘telegraph’, mrs. amy recovered herself in a breath, set her basket boldly on the seat, and said, laughing, “don’t you wish you were to have some of the salad he’s going to make, and to see the charming young ladies who are to eat it?” now that was tact, for two of the ruling foibles of the masculine mind were touched. every few weeks she would shut herself up in her room, put on her scribbling suit, and ‘fall into a vortex’, as she expressed it, writing away at her novel with all her heart and soul, for till that was finished she could find no peace. ” “such as fellows going to college, hey?” cut in laurie, with suggestive laugh. let him do what he likes, as long as he is happy. mrs. he was neither rich nor great, young nor handsome, in no respect what is called fascinating, imposing, or brilliant, and yet he was as attractive as a genial fire, and people seemed to gather about him as naturally as about a warm hearth. you are getting to be rather conceited, my dear, and it is quite time you set about correcting it. b. along this walk, on christmas day, a tall young man walked slowly, with his hands behind him, and a somewhat absent expression of countenance. ” “how delightful it is to be able to help others, isn’t it? that was always one of my dreams, to have the power of giving freely, and thanks to you, the dream has come true. he rather stared at first, as if he wasn’t used to having girls bounce into his shop and ask him to buy their hair. we thought we were coming directly home, at first, but the dear old gentleman, as soon as we were married, found he couldn’t be ready under a month, at least, and sent us off to spend our honeymoon wherever we liked. march began to talk of returning early in the new year. if she had known what birthday gift was coming every minute nearer and nearer, she would not have said to herself, “i’ll weep a little weep when i go to bed. bhaer actually had gold sleeve-buttons in his immaculate wristbands. ” i dare say you don’t, mrs. jo was not in a good humor, and the perverse fit returned, but amy, who had virtuously done her duty, kept her temper and pleased everybody, was in a most angelic frame of mind. i propose mr. “i want you to read that, please, and tell me if it is legal and right. you needn’t shrug your shoulders, and think, ‘much she knows about such things’. when he went out in the morning he was bewildered by small commissions for the captive mamma, if he came gaily in at night, eager to embrace his family, he was quenched by a “hush! they are just asleep after worrying all day. she did not hear him cross the courtyard beyond, nor see him pause in the archway that led from the subterranean path into the garden. all began bravely, but broke down one by one till beth was left alone, singing with all her heart, for to her music was always a sweet consoler. ” that had been one of her last ‘trifles’, and john’s eye had fallen on it as he spoke. “i planned to spend mine in new music,” said beth, with a little sigh, which no one heard but the hearth brush and kettle-holder. she hates lazy people. ” “but you don’t intend to try till the proper moment? bless my soul, what unearthly prudence! he’s a good fellow, amy, but not the man i fancied you’d like. “don’t be a peacock. tell him so, with my congratulations. amy being gone, laurie was her only refuge, and much as she enjoyed his society, she rather dreaded him just then, for he was an incorrigible tease, and she feared he would coax the secret from her. ” “don’t mean to have any. jo, your turn will come in time, perhaps, so listen to my ‘plans’ and help me carry them out, if they are good. “nothing could be more natural and proper than for my professor to open a school, and for me to prefer to reside in my own estate. i’ll remind you of your promise when that joyful day comes, if it ever does,” returned jo, accepting the vague but magnificent offer as gratefully as she could. after a while, they began to think he was not going to wake up till night, and i’m not sure that he would, had he not been effectually roused by amy’s cry of joy at sight of her mother. the maneuver did not succeed as well as she expected, however, for though just in the act of setting fire to a funeral pyre, the professor dropped his torch, metaphorically speaking, and made a dive after the little blue ball. “what’s the last joke? undo the bundle and see, meg,” said beth, eying the knobby parcel with curiosity. john brooke did his duty manfully for a year, got wounded, was sent home, and not allowed to return. ” “you never shall be again,” broke in laurie, putting his arm about her, as if to fence out every human ill. i never thought of anything but a traveling friendship till the serenade night. “i don’t know anything. i’ll hearten you up in a jiffy. ” “especially to gentlemen,” added may, with a look which enlightened amy as to one cause of her sudden fall from favor. “i think you are right, there. mother “that does me good! that’s worth millions of money and pecks of praise. hope and faith, born of my sorrow, guardian angels shall become, and the sister gone before me by their hands shall lead me home. don’t laugh, jo, gentlemen really are very necessary aboard ship, to hold on to, or to wait upon one, and as they have nothing to do, it’s a mercy to make them useful, otherwise they would smoke themselves to death, i’m afraid. one of the young ladies asked jo where she got the pretty drab hat she wore to the picnic and stupid jo, instead of mentioning the place where it was bought two years ago, must needs answer with unnecessary frankness, “oh, amy painted it. it’s no use, jo, we’ve got to have it out, and the sooner the better for both of us,” he answered, getting flushed and excited all at once. “what is it, deary?” asked mrs. at coblentz we had a lovely time, for some students from bonn, with whom fred got acquainted on the boat, gave us a serenade. “keep near the shore. she wasn’t there, but minnie, who is a little old woman, introduced me very prettily. it’s a dirty, noisy place, and i was glad to leave it. i hate such things, and though i think i’ve a right to be hurt, i don’t intend to show it. little beth ma chere mamma, we are all well i do my lessons always and never corroberate the girls—meg says i mean contradick so i put in both words and you can take the properest. the parrot alone was enough to drive her distracted, for he soon felt that she did not admire him, and revenged himself by being as mischievous as possible. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any defect you cause. she saw that money conferred power, money and power, therefore, she resolved to have, not to be used for herself alone, but for those whom she loved more than life. during the next fifteen minutes she looked more like a rose than ever, for everyone availed themselves of their privileges to the fullest extent, from mr. father is as regular as the sun, but there’s some delay on the way, perhaps. amy rose daily in the estimation of her friend, but he sank in hers, and each felt the truth before a word was spoken. laurie enjoyed that immensely, and when she told about the prim old gentleman who came once to woo aunt march, and in the middle of a fine speech, how poll had tweaked his wig off to his great dismay, the boy lay back and laughed till the tears ran down his cheeks, and a maid popped her head in to see what was the matter. it’s all settled, and can be carried out at once,” said mr. i agree not to expect anything from mother or you, but i do want to buy _undine and sintran_ for myself. ” “pray do, it’s quite interesting. dear jo, what ho! some english girls and boys are coming to see me tomorrow and i want to have a jolly time. i hope he truly will be, sometime. he has a temper, not like ours—one flash and then all over—but the white, still anger that is seldom stirred, but once kindled is hard to quench. “it serves me right! what business had i to put on all my best things and come philandering down here, hoping to see the professor? jo, i’m ashamed of you! no, you shall not go there to borrow an umbrella, or find out where he is, from his friends. “should we no do a little what you call shopping for the babies, and haf a farewell feast tonight if i go for my last call at your so pleasant home?” he asked, stopping before a window full of fruit and flowers. get up, and don’t be a goose, jo,” was the cavalier reply to her petition. “ditto, ditto, mr. “nothing but a story, won’t amount to much, i guess,” returned jo, carefully keeping the name of the paper out of sight. i’m not a fashionable party and don’t mean to be, but i do like harmless larks now and then, don’t you?” “yes, nobody minds them, so lark away, but don’t get wild, will you? or there will be an end of all our good times. “meg, i wish you’d go and see the hummels. ” he hoped she had not gone home—he hated gossip and interference. and then the rooms were very still while the pages were softly turned, and the winter sunshine crept in to touch the bright heads and serious faces with a christmas greeting. no one would own that they were tired of the experiment, but by friday night each acknowledged to herself that she was glad the week was nearly done. come on, meg. i don’t like my work, but i get a good deal of satisfaction out of it after all, so i won’t complain. we used to be faithful about it, but since father went away and all this war trouble unsettled us, we have neglected many things. “funny angels in hoods and mittens,” said jo, and set them to laughing. kiss dear father on the cheek he calls mine. “nothing more, except that i don’t believe i shall ever marry. “go and bring that boy down to his dinner, tell him it’s all right, and advise him not to put on tragedy airs with his grandfather. aren’t they beauties?” said the proud papa, beaming upon the little red squirmers as if they were unfledged angels. laurie thought i wasn’t proper. c. i’m sorry. meg looked worn and nervous, the babies absorbed every minute of her time, the house was neglected, and kitty, the cook, who took life ‘aisy’, kept him on short commons. glad the fine weather holds. john came home early, meg gadded no more, and that greatcoat was put on in the morning by a very happy husband, and taken off at night by a most devoted little wife. i can’t come to you, it isn’t proper,’ said she, as sweet as honey. ” “and amy, what is she going to do?” asked mrs. meg thought it was too cruel to hint about her sad failure, and the last atom of patience vanished as he spoke. march, looking with fatherly satisfaction at the four young faces gathered round him. amy poked the fire and said nothing. “no, i don’t. daisy and demi had now arrived at years of discretion, for in this fast age babies of three or four assert their rights, and get them, too, which is more than many of their elders do. “if he did speak, you wouldn’t know what to say, but would cry or blush, or let him have his own way, instead of giving a good, decided no. laurie backed precipitately into a corner, and put his hands behind him with an imploring gesture. “i know i shall forget. “twins, by jupiter!” was all he said for a minute, then turning to the women with an appealing look that was comically piteous, he added, “take ’em quick, somebody! i’m going to laugh, and i shall drop ’em. the pale roses amy gave him were the sort that the italians lay in dead hands, never in bridal wreaths, and for a moment he wondered if the omen was for jo or for himself, but the next instant his american common sense got the better of sentimentality, and he laughed a heartier laugh than amy had heard since he came. jo never knew how it happened, but something got into that story that went straight to the hearts of those who read it, for when her family had laughed and cried over it, her father sent it, much against her will, to one of the popular magazines, and to her utter surprise, it was not only paid for, but others requested. northbury, under the title of the tale. ” “oh, indeed!” said miss kate, but she might as well have said, “dear me, how dreadful!” for her tone implied it, and something in her face made meg color, and wish she had not been so frank. he looks as if he’d like to know us but he’s bashful, and meg is so prim she won’t let me speak to him when we pass,” said jo, as the plates went round, and the ice began to melt out of sight, with ohs and ahs of satisfaction. ” “and go to the theater, truly?” “a dozen theaters, if we may. returning suddenly to her admonitory tone, she said, dropping her voice, “if you must have a ‘vent’, teddy, go and devote yourself to one of the ‘pretty, modest girls’ whom you do respect, and not waste your time with the silly ones. it’s all right you see. 5. pray make brooke useful, and draw on me for funds if expenses exceed your estimate. “not quite,” replied jo modestly. “she feels it in the air—love, i mean—and she’s going very fast. “shall we see you this evening, mon frere?” asked amy, as they parted at her aunt’s door. it flew open, and there he stood in his dressing gown, with a big blue sock on one hand and a darning needle in the other. i shall go for her, and you’ve only got to bottle up your rapture, and keep beth quiet till that blessed lady gets here. mr. but when the helpful voice was silent, the daily lesson over, the beloved presence gone, and nothing remained but loneliness and grief, then jo found her promise very hard to keep. ” “but you like me in spite of it?” “yes, i do, sir. i often see his footmen lounging at the back gate, and the duke of wellington’s house is not far off. must not fret because his dress has not nine tucks. i never shall get to london if i don’t hurry. “it’s one of them horrid telegraph things, mum,” she said, handling it as if she was afraid it would explode and do some damage. ” “ahem!” coughed aunt carrol softly, with a look at aunt march. remember that, and be a sensible girl,” said the old lady impressively. try it, dear. soon the sun came out, and taking it as a good omen, i cleared up likewise and enjoyed my journey with all my heart. ” “people don’t have fortunes left them in that style nowadays, men have to work and women marry for money. “i’ve got the key to mine, but i’m not allowed to try it. “only if brooke is going to be a thermometer, i must mind and have fair weather for him to report. “i’m too tired to go this afternoon,” replied meg, rocking comfortably as she sewed. i came to get my umbrella, that is, to see how your father finds himself today,” said mr. i must help my boys first, because, even for you, i may not break my word to minna. i preferred to stay at home and write letters. i was in our parlor last evening when mr. but monsieur could not wait even a ‘flash of time’, and in the middle of the speech departed to find mademoiselle himself. he ran, he flew, he pranced, his face glowed, his bald head shown, his coattails waved wildly, his pumps actually twinkled in the air, and when the music stopped, he wiped the drops from his brow, and beamed upon his fellow men like a french pickwick without glasses. am i all right, jo?” cried meg in a flutter. i didn’t mean it! it was so wicked, so untrue and ungrateful, how could i say it! oh, how could i say it!” he was very kind, forgave her readily, and did not utter one reproach, but meg knew that she had done and said a thing which would not be forgotten soon, although he might never allude to it again. make a good, popular book, and get as much money as you can. i’ll give it to you, marmee, just to remember past glories by, for a crop is so comfortable i don’t think i shall ever have a mane again. “dancing and french gloves. amy never would pet him like the others, but she was very glad to see him now, and quite clung to him, feeling that he was the representative of the dear family for whom she longed more than she would confess. ” “much obliged. “here’s mother, dear, and you shall have another bird tomorrow, if you want it. bhaer soon joined her, looking rather out of his element, and presently several of the philosophers, each mounted on his hobby, came ambling up to hold an intellectual tournament in the recess. leaning low over this dearest of her sisters, she kissed the damp forehead with her heart on her lips, and softly whispered, “good-by, my beth. ” “ah, yes, i know. laurence had insisted on giving it. “i supposed you’d take it so. love jo all your days, if you choose, but don’t let it spoil you, for it’s wicked to throw away so many good gifts because you can’t have the one you want. laurie sat turning the little ring on his finger, and amy put the last touches to the hasty sketch she had been working at while she talked. beth had old-fashioned fragrant flowers in her garden, sweet peas and mignonette, larkspur, pinks, pansies, and southernwood, with chickweed for the birds and catnip for the pussies. and i can only stay home and knit, like a poky old woman!” and jo shook the blue army sock till the needles rattled like castanets, and her ball bounded across the room. lamb, with whom she was a favorite, and forced to hear a long account of lucretia’s last attack, while three delightful young gentlemen hovered near, waiting for a pause when they might rush in and rescue her. the penitent kiss was better than a world of words, and john had her on his knee in a minute, saying tenderly. she started when spoken to, blushed when looked at, was very quiet, and sat over her sewing, with a timid, troubled look on her face. “bless her heart! she pities him, so she is good to him,” said jo, beaming at her from the croquet ground. “oh, tell me about it! i love dearly to hear people describe their travels. “well, then, why didn’t thou tell me all this sooner?” asked jo bashfully. “much obliged for that recommendation. information about the mission of project gutenberg™ project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. the old gentleman liked the fun, and amused himself by sending odd bundles, mysterious messages, and funny telegrams, and his gardener, who was smitten with hannah’s charms, actually sent a love letter to jo’s care. i shall drop it or smash it, as sure as fate. i never force my children’s confidence, and i seldom have to wait for long. ”_ heidelberg my dear mamma, having a quiet hour before we leave for berne, i’ll try to tell you what has happened, for some of it is very important, as you will see. i’m very, very sorry. i admire both, and feel rich in my new ‘friend friedrich bhaer’. but once get used to these slight blemishes and nothing could be more complete, for good sense and good taste had presided over the furnishing, and the result was highly satisfactory. he very naturally fell to studying her from this new point of view, and before the evening was half over, had decided that ‘little amy was going to make a very charming woman’. one discovered that money couldn’t keep shame and sorrow out of rich people’s houses, another that, though she was poor, she was a great deal happier, with her youth, health, and good spirits, than a certain fretful, feeble old lady who couldn’t enjoy her comforts, a third that, disagreeable as it was to help get dinner, it was harder still to go begging for it and the fourth, that even carnelian rings were not so valuable as good behavior. come, i’ll be good. “the laurence boy’s grandfather! what in the world put such a thing into his head? we don’t know him!” exclaimed meg. happy amy!” and jo sighed, then smiled brightly as professor bhaer opened the gate with an impatient push. “we can’t decide anything till he has been. she is very proud of him, just as he is, and said yesterday that she thought poverty was a beautiful thing. beth is as regular about her tasks as a clock, and never forgets what you told her. she said when you spoiled the others that she shouldn’t get you any more this winter. beth whisked it off, and in her half-averted face read a tender sorrow that made her own eyes fill. ” “i didn’t know how much till she abused you,” began meg. books and papers everywhere, a broken meerschaum, and an old flute over the mantlepiece as if done with, a ragged bird without any tail chirped on one window seat, and a box of white mice adorned the other. and mrs. she also fancied, having set her heart upon seeing it, that she saw a certain increase of gentleness in laurie’s manner, that he dropped his voice now and then, laughed less than usual, was a little absent-minded, and settled the afghan over beth’s feet with an assiduity that was really almost tender. that stupid high heel turned and gave me a sad wrench. i never snivel over trifles like that. it cost him no effort to be generous, and he would have given amy all the trinkets in nice if she would have taken them, but at the same time he felt that he could not change the opinion she was forming of him, and he rather dreaded the keen blue eyes that seemed to watch him with such half-sorrowful, half-scornful surprise. but the trifles cost more than one would imagine, and when she cast up her accounts at the end of the month the sum total rather scared her. meg, as the eldest, was samuel pickwick, jo, being of a literary turn, augustus snodgrass, beth, because she was round and rosy, tracy tupman, and amy, who was always trying to do what she couldn’t, was nathaniel winkle. “i remember a time when this hand was white and smooth, and your first care was to keep it so. i didn’t see the name distinctly. ” thanks to the conspirators, the tables were turned that night, for hayes sent up a wilderness of flowers, with a lovely basket arranged in his best manner for a centerpiece. “you do look just like our own dear meg, only so very sweet and lovely that i should hug you if it wouldn’t crumple your dress,” cried amy, surveying her with delight when all was done. that’s not my way. then jo and meg, with a detachment of the bigger boys, set forth the supper on the grass, for an out-of-door tea was always the crowning joy of the day. there’s the tea bell, we have it early on the boy’s account. no wonder they laughed, for the expression of his face was droll enough to convulse a quaker, as he stood and stared wildly from the unconscious innocents to the hilarious spectators with such dismay that jo sat down on the floor and screamed. ” hannah nodded without speaking, for her lips twitched nervously, meg dropped down into a chair as the strength seemed to go out of her limbs at the sound of those words, and jo, standing with a pale face for a minute, ran to the parlor, snatched up the telegram, and throwing on her things, rushed out into the storm. ” “i’d rather stay here, thank you. barker doing up the lunch in a hamper and a great basket. john did not find meg’s beauty diminished, though she beamed at him from behind the familiar coffee pot. ” laurie sat bold upright, and meekly took her empty plate feeling an odd sort of pleasure in having ‘little amy’ order him about, for she had lost her shyness now, and felt an irrestible desire to trample on him, as girls have a delightful way of doing when lords of creation show any signs of subjection. so they asked an old woman what spell they could use to make them happy, and she said, ‘when you feel discontented, think over your blessings, and be grateful. march’s voice had not been heard calling, “jo, dear, come in. now mr. home is a nice place, though it isn’t splendid,” said meg, looking about her with a restful expression, as she sat with her mother and jo on the sunday evening. even when he went away, and her mother was called to devote her skill and energy to soldiers’ aid societies, beth went faithfully on by herself and did the best she could. laurie came sneaking into the kitchen of the dovecote one saturday, with an excited face, and was received with the clash of cymbals, for hannah clapped her hands with a saucepan in one and the cover in the other. do you remember?” asked jo, breaking a short pause which had followed a long conversation about many things. most people start at our website which has the main pg search facility: www. laurence. ” “oh, my goodness! that little goose means a centaur, and she called him a cyclops,” exclaimed jo, with a burst of laughter. pickwick had plunged his head and shoulders into a tub of water, upset a keg of soft soap upon his manly form, and torn his garments badly. amy fared worst of all, for her resources were small, and when her sisters left her to amuse herself, she soon found that accomplished and important little self a great burden. “friedrich, why didn’t you. “but we’ll have another play sometime that he can see. ” “he’s my child, and i won’t have his temper spoiled by indulgence. too weak to wonder at anything, she only smiled and nestled close in the loving arms about her, feeling that the hungry longing was satisfied at last. ” “i shall hope so,” was all he said, but he meant more than she imagined, and the grave, kind look he gave her made her feel as if the words weekly volcano were printed in large type on her forehead. beth kept her face hidden on her mother’s shoulder, but amy stood like a graceful statue, with a most becoming ray of sunshine touching her white forehead and the flower in her hair. march couldn’t get over her surprise, and insisted on shaking hands with every one of the featherless birds, from tall franz and emil to the little quadroon, who had the sweetest voice of all. beth, who was collecting the scattered author cards, looked up and said, in her shy yet friendly way, “i’m afraid you are tired. “what do you—that is, what compensation—” began jo, not exactly knowing how to express herself. “has jo smashed all the bottles by accident?” he whispered, “or am i merely laboring under a delusion that i saw some lying about loose this morning?” “no, your grandfather kindly offered us his best, and aunt march actually sent some, but father put away a little for beth, and dispatched the rest to the soldier’s home. ” “try a little now. “you pushed it. i’ve seen unfortunate little creatures left to servants, or backward ones pushed forward, when it’s real cruelty. i’m dying for some music, and always like yours. my respects to your mother. “one thing i leave in your especial care,” she said, the night before she left. he gave a stroke, his ball hit the wicket, and stopped an inch on the wrong side. 8. ” and slamming the door in meg’s face, aunt march drove off in high dudgeon. laurence has commissions for me in washington, and it will give me real satisfaction to be of service to her there. 9. i’ll try to sing the song of the shepherd boy which the pilgrims heard. doesn’t that sound sort of elegant and rich? flo and i, for the fun of it, ordered a hansom cab, while aunt and uncle were out, and went for a drive, though we learned afterward that it wasn’t the thing for young ladies to ride in them alone. ” no one did for several months, but the word ‘fete’ always produced a general smile, and laurie’s birthday gift to amy was a tiny coral lobster in the shape of a charm for her watch guard. cutter the fish-man. jo had sudden fits of sobriety, and was seen to shake her fist at mr. meg admired the tragedy, so jo piled up the agony to suit her, while amy objected to the fun, and, with the best intentions in life, jo quenched the spritly scenes which relieved the somber character of the story. when her heart got heavy with longings for mother or fears for father, she went away into a certain closet, hid her face in the folds of a dear old gown, and made her little moan and prayed her little prayer quietly by herself. tell me something nice, marmee. it took several strokes to regain the place she had lost, and when she got there, the other side had nearly won, for kate’s ball was the last but one and lay near the stake. you are sixteen now, quite old enough to be my confidant, and my experience will be useful to you by-and-by, perhaps, in your own affairs of this sort. this did not suit jo at all, but she accepted the place since nothing better appeared and, to every one’s surprise, got on remarkably well with her irascible relative. ” “she doesn’t look like my jo any more, but i love her dearly for it!” as everyone exclaimed, and beth hugged the cropped head tenderly, jo assumed an indifferent air, which did not deceive anyone a particle, and said, rumpling up the brown bush and trying to look as if she liked it, “it doesn’t affect the fate of the nation, so don’t wail, beth. his clothes were rusty, his hands were large, and he hadn’t a really handsome feature in his face, except his beautiful teeth, yet i liked him, for he had a fine head, his linen was very nice, and he looked like a gentleman, though two buttons were off his coat and there was a patch on one shoe. if anyone had known the care lavished on that dolly, i think it would have touched their hearts, even while they laughed. “i’m glad mine is blue,” said amy. “you’d better see what you have got before you think of having company,” said meg, when informed of the hospitable but rash act. not an invalid exactly, but never again the rosy, healthy creature she had been, yet always hopeful, happy, and serene, and busy with the quiet duties she loved, everyone’s friend, and an angel in the house, long before those who loved her most had learned to know it. bhaer with a smile as he watched the fragments fly away on the wind. ” jo was very much relieved that one of his virtuous fits should come on just then, and made her preparations with a lightened heart, for beth seemed more cheerful, and hoped she was doing the best for all. ” “why should they?” and mrs. ” “didn’t the girls laugh at the picture?” asked jo, who relished the scrape. mother would admire his warm heart, father his wise head. ” it troubled her to remember that now, she wished she could take it back, it sounded so unwomanly. be very kind, and don’t let her think anyone watches or talks about her. then the bois and champs elysees are _tres magnifique_. when they got up on saturday morning, there was no fire in the kitchen, no breakfast in the dining room, and no mother anywhere to be seen. it was a lively scene, for soon the spirit of the social season took possession of everyone, and christmas merriment made all faces shine, hearts happy, and heels light. “take it all. march kissed him, with a whisper full of motherly solicitude. you both got into your right places, and i felt sure that it was well off with the old love before it was on with the new, that i could honestly share my heart between sister jo and wife amy, and love them dearly. now if there is anything mortifying to our feelings when we are young, it is to be told that, and to be bidden to “run away, dear” is still more trying to us. project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the u. as the omnibus contained only one other passenger, a sleepy old lady, amy pocketed her veil and beguiled the tedium of the way by trying to find out where all her money had gone to. march is coming right away,” said hannah, with an air of relief, when jo told the good news. pray, don’t fly into a passion. “oh, john, i am so tired and hot and cross and worried! i’ve been at it till i’m all worn out. this was the moment for the calm, proper speech, but meg didn’t make it. jo spent the morning on the river with laurie and the afternoon reading and crying over _the wide, wide world_, up in the apple tree. as she turned the pages rich in dainty devices with very pardonable pride, her eye fell upon one verse that made her stop and think. march was not so blind to her children’s interest as mrs. as the four sisters went home through the garden, miss kate looked after them, saying, without the patronizing tone in her voice, “in spite of their demonstrative manners, american girls are very nice when one knows them. it’s simmering now, so i hope he’ll keep out of my way,” returned jo, biting her lips as she glowered at fred from under her big hat. “then i don’t feel as if i’d wasted my life. dr. it was well for all that this peaceful time was given them as preparation for the sad hours to come, for by-and-by, beth said the needle was ‘so heavy’, and put it down forever. “who are your heroes?” asked jo. “come, jo, don’t be thorny. while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate. i wash my hands of the dinner party, and since you have asked laurie on your own responsibility, you may just take care of him. presently he sat down beside her, and said, in his most wheedlesome tone, “now be a sensible little woman, and do as they say. ” laurie went off two stairs at a time, and jo laid her wearied head down on beth’s little brown hood, which no one had thought of moving from the table where she left it. you know he thinks that wine should be used only in illness, and mother says that neither she nor her daughters will ever offer it to any young man under her roof. ” in they both came, mrs. he carefully stirred up the embers of his lost love, but they refused to burst into a blaze. ” and amy went on with her work, in the proud consciousness of virtue and the successful utterance of two long words in a breath. ” a pleasing fiction, by the way, for jo had no more idea of music than a grasshopper. ” “why should you, with so much energy and talent?” “that’s just why, because talent isn’t genius, and no amount of energy can make it so. “oh, laurie, is it really you? i thought you’d never come!” cried amy, dropping the reins and holding out both hands, to the great scandalization of a french mamma, who hastened her daughter’s steps, lest she should be demoralized by beholding the free manners of these ‘mad english’. bhaer smiled, as he glanced from the pickle factory on one side to the wholesale hide and leather concern on the other, but he only said politely, “you haf no umbrella. ” “can’t somebody read to you?” “grandpa does sometimes, but my books don’t interest him, and i hate to ask brooke all the time. you could do nothing at home, and it is a great comfort to them to know that you are well and happy, and enjoying so much, my dear. my small news will sound very flat after her splendors, but you will like them, i know. so i just settled the difficulty by saying, ‘let’s be married, and then we can do as we like’. ” and, to the dismay of the rest of the club, jo threw open the door of the closet, and displayed laurie sitting on a rag bag, flushed and twinkling with suppressed laughter. ” i thanked him as well as i could, and talk now about ‘my library’, as if i had a hundred books. she blushed with pleasure, but somehow the compliment did not satisfy her like the blunt praises he used to give her at home, when he promenaded round her on festival occasions, and told her she was ‘altogether jolly’, with a hearty smile and an approving pat on the head. so you intend to marry a man without money, position, or business, and go on working harder than you do now, when you might be comfortable all your days by minding me and doing better? i thought you had more sense, meg. he felt that his blighted affections were quite dead now, and though he should never cease to be a faithful mourner, there was no occasion to wear his weeds ostentatiously. speak low, and tell me all about it. italians are always nice,” said meg, who was a little sentimental. we won’t be miserable, but enjoy being together while we wait. ” “very well, then, come on. i call him ‘john’ now. he missed her, however, and she came walking in with a very queer expression of countenance, for there was a mixture of fun and fear, satisfaction and regret in it, which puzzled the family as much as did the roll of bills she laid before her mother, saying with a little choke in her voice, “that’s my contribution toward making father comfortable and bringing him home!” “my dear, where did you get it? twenty-five dollars! jo, i hope you haven’t done anything rash?” “no, it’s mine honestly. “ah! but we shall not meet often, i fear, this place is at the west. meg this note, prettily written on scented paper, was a great contrast to the next, which was scribbled on a big sheet of thin foreign paper, ornamented with blots and all manner of flourishes and curly-tailed letters. feeling that the neighbors were interested in her movements, she wished to efface the memory of yesterday’s failure by a grand success today, so she ordered the ‘cherry bounce’, and drove away in state to meet and escort her guests to the banquet. demi also saw the smile, was impressed by it, and artlessy inquired. bhaer came in one evening to pause on the threshold of the study, astonished by the spectacle that met his eye. “it was too bad to laugh at the poor little jelly pots. “rome took all the vanity out of me, for after seeing the wonders there, i felt too insignificant to live and gave up all my foolish hopes in despair. bhaer talked well in this genial atmosphere, and did himself justice. you are a mere infant, but you’ll go next, jo, and we’ll be left lamenting,” said laurie, shaking his head over the degeneracy of the times. ” “we’ll work like bees, and love it too, see if we don’t,” said jo. 3. laurence, but says he’s very proud and doesn’t like to mix with his neighbors. of course there was a general stampede, and for several minutes everybody seemed to lose their wits, for the strangest things were done, and no one said a word. yes, yes, a thick, warm shawl would be a friendly thing to take the little mother. i shall see and hear new things, get new ideas, and even if i haven’t much time there, i shall bring home quantities of material for my rubbish. “an old maid, that’s what i’m to be. ” here there was a choke that couldn’t be controlled, so he decapitated buttercups while he cleared his ‘confounded throat’. my heart! what shall i do? i don’t know anything about them, thought beth, and forgetting the boy’s misfortune in her flurry, she said, hoping to make him talk, “i never saw any hunting, but i suppose you know all about it. the pleasant curves about his mouth were the memorials of many friendly words and cheery laughs, his eyes were never cold or hard, and his big hand had a warm, strong grasp that was more expressive than words. so jo, feeling that her late lessons in cookery were to do her honor, went to preside over the coffeepot, while the children collected dry sticks, and the boys made a fire and got water from a spring near by. mr. “how shall i behave here?” she asked, as they approached the third mansion. you may begin. the solitary woman felt an interest in the ambitious girl, and kindly conferred many favors of this sort both on jo and the professor. “the little girl was sorry for them, and asked an old woman what she should do to help them. laws alone swamp our small staff. ’” “back i went, and made the primroses as interesting as ever i could. “there is a lovely old-fashioned pearl set in the treasure chest, but mother said real flowers were the prettiest ornament for a young girl, and laurie promised to send me all i want,” replied meg. ” “he’ll try his hand at it there, if i propose it. he is a truly excellent young man, and we could not refuse to listen to him, but i will not consent to meg’s engaging herself so young. he wheedled, bribed, ridiculed, threatened, and scolded; affected indifference, that he might surprise the truth from her; declared he knew, then that he didn’t care; and at last, by dint of perseverance, he satisfied himself that it concerned meg and mr. but it gets sicker and sicker, and i think you or hannah ought to go. “didn’t you cheat at croquet?” “well, yes, a little bit. s. ” “why not?” “i’ll tell you some day. march put the note in the fire, the money in her purse, and went on with her preparations, with her lips folded tightly in a way which jo would have understood if she had been there. will you, lovey?” “iss!” and demi shut his eyes tight, as if to catch sleep and hurry the desired day. the latter informs the party that she bequeaths untold wealth to the young pair and an awful doom to don pedro, if he doesn’t make them happy. ” and meg laughed also at the queer look which the sisters exchanged as she thus described her supposed lover. i made a ‘pome’ yesterday, when i was helping hannah wash, and as father likes my silly little things, i put it in to amuse him. “it is too soon yet for the young ladies to wear these things. “i have great hopes for my boy,” observed jo, watching him fly over the fence with an approving smile. she was flirting her fan and laughing at the feeble jokes of a young gentleman who tried to be witty, when she suddenly stopped laughing and looked confused, for just opposite, she saw laurie. she likewise set up housekeeping in the sideboard, and managed a microscopic cooking stove with a skill that brought tears of pride to hannah’s eyes, while demi learned his letters with his grandfather, who invented a new mode of teaching the alphabet by forming letters with his arms and legs, thus uniting gymnastics for head and heels. brooke, who said all in one breath, “i couldn’t help hearing, meg. “if mother was only at home!” exclaimed jo, seizing the book, and feeling that washington was an immense way off. ” “you must sit still all you can and keep your back out of sight. how hannah came in to exclaim, “sakes alive, well i never!” in great astonishment at ‘that jo’s doin’s’. you see i’ve been abroad a good many years, and haven’t been into company enough yet to know how you do things here. you live near us, don’t you?” “next door. then, sitting in beth’s little chair close beside him, jo told her troubles, the resentful sorrow for her loss, the fruitless efforts that discouraged her, the want of faith that made life look so dark, and all the sad bewilderment which we call despair. while amy stood laughing on the bank above him as she scattered crumbs to the brilliant birds, laurie looked at her as she had looked at him, with a natural curiosity to see what changes time and absence had wrought. let it wait and ripen,” was her father’s advice, and he practiced what he preached, having waited patiently thirty years for fruit of his own to ripen, and being in no haste to gather it even now when it was sweet and mellow. she reproached herself for her share of the ill feeling and resolved to exonerate amy as soon as possible. we fell into the way of doing so at the hospital, and he likes it. “they are trash, and will soon be worse trash if i go on, for each is more sensational than the last. amy was much offended that her overtures of peace had been repulsed, and began to wish she had not humbled herself, to feel more injured than ever, and to plume herself on her superior virtue in a way which was particularly exasperating. laurence found it impossible to go to sleep. the parlor struck her as looking uncommonly shabby, but without stopping to sigh for what she had not, she skillfully made the best of what she had, arranging chairs over the worn places in the carpet, covering stains on the walls with homemade statuary, which gave an artistic air to the room, as did the lovely vases of flowers jo scattered about. ” “i’m not,” put in jo decidedly. she meant to warn him that laurie would not bear much restraint, and hoped he would be more forebearing with the lad. ” “bless her dear heart! she won’t think so when she has a literary husband, and a dozen little professors and professorins to support. thank you for defending me, and aunt march for proving that you do care for me a little bit. “look under your pillows christmas morning, and you will find your guidebook,” replied mrs. take your light gloves and the embroidered handkerchief. it is natural and right you should all go to homes of your own in time, but i do want to keep my girls as long as i can, and i am sorry that this happened so soon, for meg is only seventeen and it will be some years before john can make a home for her. “how could that bring you?” she asked, wondering what he meant. ” jo’s cheeks were as red as her ribbon, and she wondered what he thought of her, but she didn’t care, for in a minute she found herself walking away arm in arm with her professor, feeling as if the sun had suddenly burst out with uncommon brilliancy, that the world was all right again, and that one thoroughly happy woman was paddling through the wet that day. here, cherished like a household saint in its shrine, sat beth, tranquil and busy as ever, for nothing could change the sweet, unselfish nature, and even while preparing to leave life, she tried to make it happier for those who should remain behind. “it’s not exactly going out to service, for mrs. “nice little boy, but rather a short pole to support. turn slowly round, and let me get a careful view. au revoir, madamoiselle,” and laurie bent as if to kiss her hand, in the foreign fashion, which became him better than many men. “i only said i was too young to do anything about it yet, that i didn’t wish to have secrets from you, and he must speak to father. “i’m glad i live in it then. ” “they are going out to supper now. then, to complicate the ruin, she cut it down one third, and confidingly sent the poor little romance, like a picked robin, out into the big, busy world to try its fate. the plaintive wail which succeeded the passionate roar went to meg’s heart, and she ran up to say beseechingly. i never made any plans about what i’d do when i grew up. “please forgive me, jo. ” “no,” said jo, “that dozy way wouldn’t suit me. bhaer, with a defiant nod, as if the walls of mist closing round them were barriers which he was to surmount or valiantly knock down. “is it meant to use as you use the string of good-smelling wooden beads hanging over your glass?” asked amy. ” “i thought so. amy stirred and sighed in her sleep, and as if eager to begin at once to mend her fault, jo looked up with an expression on her face which it had never worn before. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1. all this surprised and flattered her, though she did not understand it till miss belle looked up from her writing, and said, with a sentimental air. laurie took sallie, jo, and ned. “she’s not a stricken deer anyway,” said ned, trying to be witty, and succeeding as well as very young gentlemen usually do. ” “i can’t. i love to teach, and this is easier than german,” broke in john, getting possession of the other hand, so that she had no way of hiding her face as he bent to look into it. let your flowers hang, don’t be so careful of them, and be sure you don’t trip,” returned sallie, trying not to care that meg was prettier than herself. “watch and pray, dear, never get tired of trying, and never think it is impossible to conquer your fault,” said mrs. the house bills were all paid, the books all in order. ” jo laughed, and meg sharply ordered her not to talk, then amiably promised to make her hair curl, and fell asleep to dream of living in her castle in the air. little girls shouldn’t ask questions,” returned jo sharply. i never did like that miss randal and now i hate her!” said artful amy, wishing to be sure of her facts this time. e. “ha, ha! never say die, take a pinch of snuff, goodbye, goodbye!” squalled polly, dancing on her perch, and clawing at the old lady’s cap as laurie tweaked him in the rear. ” amy held her tongue, but used her eyes, and saw meg slip a fan into her pocket. ” jo could not speak, and for several minutes there was no sound but the sigh of the wind and the lapping of the tide. it was no paler and but littler thinner than in the autumn, yet there was a strange, transparent look about it, as if the mortal was being slowly refined away, and the immortal shining through the frail flesh with an indescribably pathetic beauty. i’m not afraid, but it seems as if i should be homesick for you even in heaven. “i don’t think i like it only because it’s so pretty, but i want to wear it as the girl in the story wore her bracelet, to remind me of something. i am glad a task to me is given, to labor at day by day, for it brings me health and strength and hope, and i cheerfully learn to say, “head, you may think, heart, you may feel, but, hand, you shall work alway!” dear mother, there is only room for me to send my love, and some pressed pansies from the root i have been keeping safe in the house for father to see. i’ve got to help amy, so you go and make yourself splendid, and if you’ll be so very kind as to let hayes take a few nice flowers up to the hall, i’ll bless you forever. another knock and the appearance of two young ladies sent me back to my work, and there i virtuously remained through all the noise and gabbling that went on next door. are you afraid of me, margaret?” and mr. ” “do you mean aunt march?” asked her mother, laughing. therefore, to use the expressive, if not elegant, language of a schoolgirl, “he was as nervous as a witch and as cross as a bear”. commander in chief sends best wishes, in which he is heartily joined by. amy can stay and make herself useful if she isn’t sick, which i’ve no doubt she will be, looks like it now. “i gave my best to the country i love, and kept my tears till he was gone. “what’s the name?” asked beth, wondering why jo kept her face behind the sheet. “how we got out of the slough and through the wicket gate by resolving to be good, and up the steep hill by trying, and that maybe the house over there, full of splendid things, is going to be our palace beautiful. as jo received her good-night kiss, mrs. she read a page, looked at beth, felt her head, peeped into her throat, and then said gravely, “you’ve been over the baby every day for more than a week, and among the others who are going to have it, so i’m afraid you are going to have it, beth. gnarled olive trees covered the hills with their dusky foliage, fruit hung golden in the orchard, and great scarlet anemones fringed the roadside, while beyond green slopes and craggy heights, the maritime alps rose sharp and white against the blue italian sky. she could not say, “i’m glad to go,” for life was very sweet for her. by the way, she seems brighter this last day or two. everybody was there. go back and begin it, child. jo thought what a blaze her pile of papers upstairs would make, and her hard-earned money lay rather heavily on her conscience at that minute. “girls, girls! have you you both got nice pocket handkerchiefs?” “yes, yes, spandy nice, and meg has cologne on hers,” cried jo, adding with a laugh as they went on, “i do believe marmee would ask that if we were all running away from an earthquake. what a selfish beast i’ve been!” and laurie pulled his own hair, with a remorseful look. ] a sad accident on friday last, we were startled by a violent shock in our basement, followed by cries of distress. “i suspect that is a wise man,” remarked mr. i’ll let it simmer, and see what comes of it,” he said, with a secret suspicion all the while that it wasn’t genius, but something far more common. his place is there as well as yours, and the children need him. the clock struck six and, having swept up the hearth, beth put a pair of slippers down to warm. she was still redder and more uncomfortable a moment after, when a sudden turn in the conversation introduced the subject of dress. “now, grandma’s sixtieth birthday! long life to her, with three times three!” that was given with a will, as you may well believe, and the cheering once begun, it was hard to stop it. mr. ” “your what?” cried jo, for laurie uttered those two words with an unconscious pride and satisfaction which betrayed him. “i’ll teach you whether we play _hamlet_ or not. to our venerable benefactor mr. “you say often you wish a library. she tries to learn everything, and really goes to market beyond her years, likewise keeps accounts, with my help, quite wonderful. ” “you’re an artful little puss to flatter and wheedle your cross old sister in that way. ” “shall you care if jo does marry mr. “aunt carrol is going abroad next month, and wants. ” “of course you did, and spoiled your story by beginning at the wrong end. ” jo wanted to lay her head down on that motherly bosom, and cry her grief and anger all away, but tears were an unmanly weakness, and she felt so deeply injured that she really couldn’t quite forgive yet. for then the marches, laurences, brookes and bhaers turned out in full force and made a day of it. to the seaside they went, after much discussion, and though beth didn’t come home as plump and rosy as could be desired, she was much better, while mrs. laurie and jo rowed one boat, mr. “why, you see, the girls are always buying them, and unless you want to be thought mean, you must do it too. he hasn’t any business, has he?” “not yet. i am glad of this, for though i should be very proud of a graceful statue made by her, i shall be infinitely prouder of a lovable daughter with a talent for making life beautiful to herself and others. i don’t know whether the shearing sobered our black sheep, but i do know that in all washington i couldn’t find anything beautiful enough to be bought with the five-and-twenty dollars my good girl sent me. ” “just listen to me a minute, and be a good child,” said meg soothingly. jo fancied he remembered and regretted the past, and she wished she had held her tongue. his meals were interrupted by the frequent flight of the presiding genius, who deserted him, half-helped, if a muffled chirp sounded from the nest above. ” and hanging the antique broad-brim on a bust of plato, jo read her letters. you’re not half good enough for—well, whoever the modest girl may be. the carriages were promised, meg and mother were all ready to do the honors, beth was able to help hannah behind the scenes, jo had engaged to be as lively and amiable as an absent mind, and aching head, and a very decided disapproval of everybody and everything would allow, and as she wearily dressed, amy cheered herself with anticipations of the happy moment when, lunch safely over, she should drive away with her friends for an afternoon of artistic delights, for the ‘cherry bounce’ and the broken bridge were her strong points. and three times a day, jo smiled at her fritz from the head of a long table lined on either side with rows of happy young faces, which all turned to her with affectionate eyes, confiding words, and grateful hearts, full of love for ‘mother bhaer’. he doesn’t see that i want him, and i don’t know how to tell him without words. “that devilish professor you were always writing about. ” and jo gave her a slight shake. ” meg always insisted upon it that the kiss won the victory, for after it was given, demi sobbed more quietly, and lay quite still at the bottom of the bed, whither he had wriggled in his anguish of mind. it was better still to see amy pay him the daughterly duty and affection which completely won his old heart, and best of all, to watch laurie revolve about the two, as if never tired of enjoying the pretty picture they made. we are a set of rascals this morning, but we’ll come home regular angels. chapter forty-one learning to forget amy’s lecture did laurie good, though, of course, he did not own it till long afterward. laurie went away, and his guest amused herself in her own way. they treat by turns, and i’ve had ever so many but haven’t returned them, and i ought for they are debts of honor, you know. i never can bear to be ‘lorded over’, so that settled my mind, and i did it. march, so i suppose he was the attraction. shivering, dripping, and crying, they got amy home, and after an exciting time of it, she fell asleep, rolled in blankets before a hot fire. i couldn’t bear a rich husband,” said jo decidedly, adding in a softer tone, “don’t fear poverty. it’s the sort father used to tell us,” said beth thoughtfully, putting the needles straight on jo’s cushion. ought to have called me before,’ he said crossly. when this excitement was over, beth waited to see what would happen. if i can’t, i shall fall into a chair and be graceful. tell me how you do it, marmee dear. it worries me though. “it’s all a mistake, he didn’t send it. mr. such delightful times as we are having! sight-seeing from morning till night, stopping for nice lunches in the gay _cafes_, and meeting with all sorts of droll adventures. “just as she likes, of course. but it was too late, there was no room for it, and coasting onto the floor, it disappeared in a most mysterious manner. ” she laughed as she spoke, and mr. he sat down near me, and i began to talk to him, for he looked poor and tired and anxious. aim at the highest, and never mind the money. it was a very long day and a hard one for amy, as she sat behind her table, often quite alone, for the little girls deserted very soon. there must be ways, it can’t be too late. brooke, he is so kind. chapter eight jo meets apollyon “girls, where are you going?” asked amy, coming into their room one saturday afternoon, and finding them getting ready to go out with an air of secrecy which excited her curiosity. i suppose that’s what you are rummaging after among my things. gardiner would be happy to see miss march and miss josephine at a little dance on new year’s eve. the big trunk stood ready in the hall, mother’s cloak and bonnet lay on the sofa, and mother herself sat trying to eat, but looking so pale and worn with sleeplessness and anxiety that the girls found it very hard to keep their resolution. the quaint old garden had sheltered many pairs of lovers, and seemed expressly made for them, so sunny and secluded was it, with nothing but the tower to overlook them, and the wide lake to carry away the echo of their words, as it rippled by below. read him well, and he will help you much, for the study of character in this book will help you to read it in the world and paint it with your pen. “i was detained by the way, but i promised to spend christmas with you, and here i am. ” they all drew to the fire, mother in the big chair with beth at her feet, meg and amy perched on either arm of the chair, and jo leaning on the back, where no one would see any sign of emotion if the letter should happen to be touching. “these things are always seen and felt in a person’s manner and conversations, if modestly used, but it is not necessary to display them,” said mrs. meg and jo came running down to behold the miracle which had been wrought, and amy, feeling very precious and self-sacrificing, promised to go, if the doctor said beth was going to be ill. could i ask what’s the matter? you don’t look exactly easy in your mind. miss norton had the entree into most society, which jo would have had no chance of seeing but for her. upon the last lid’s polished field— legend now both fair and true a gallant knight bears on his shield, “amy” in letters gold and blue. i always imagine it is as it is in the picture, where the shining ones stretch out their hands to welcome poor christian as he comes up from the river. i’m busy!’” he laughed as he spoke, but the laugh was not natural, and a shade passed over his face, for the utterance of the familiar name touched the wound that was not healed yet. ” “we will, marmee, we will!” cried both, with all their hearts, as she bade them good night. “if god spares beth, i never will complain again,” whispered meg earnestly. the songs she sang, without lament, in her prison-house of pain, forever are they sweetly blent with the falling summer rain. “you look like the effigy of a young knight asleep on his tomb,” she said, carefully tracing the well-cut profile defined against the dark stone. all other errands were done, and meg and her mother busy at some necessary needlework, while beth and amy got tea, and hannah finished her ironing with what she called a ‘slap and a bang’, but still jo did not come. grandfather is out, so you needn’t be afraid,” said laurie, getting up. “a quick temper. the boiled tea was very bitter, the omelet scorched, and the biscuits speckled with saleratus, but mrs. when they were called in, laurie was standing by their mother with such a penitent face that jo forgave him on the spot, but did not think it wise to betray the fact. you can do as you please, but i shall keep my book on the table here and read a little every morning as soon as i wake, for i know it will do me good and help me through the day. “i came the minute i heard. “so the poor knight is to be left sticking in the hedge, is he?” asked mr. beth’s new ‘ink bib’ was capital, and hannah’s box of hard gingerbread will be a treasure. it drizzled a little, shone a little, blew a little, and didn’t make up its mind till it was too late for anyone else to make up theirs. brooke. i know they will remember all i said to them, that they will be loving children to you, will do their duty faithfully, fight their bosom enemies bravely, and conquer themselves so beautifully that when i come back to them i may be fonder and prouder than ever of my little women. you are not listening to my moral remarks, mrs. the women telegraphed their approval to one another, and mr. “i thank you, and come one more time before i go. suppose you ask grandfather after the doctor has been. “i’ve been routed up early all winter and had to spend my days working for other people, so now i’m going to rest and revel to my heart’s content. this is the way we went on. being brought up where wine is as common as water and almost as harmless, i don’t care for it, but when a pretty girl offers it, one doesn’t like to refuse, you see. “i found it by chance. prone upon the floor lay mr. “no, i don’t,” was the blunt reply. leaving her sister to her own devices, amy proceeded to enjoy herself to her heart’s content. ” “mine are spoiled with lemonade, and i can’t get any new ones, so i shall have to go without,” said jo, who never troubled herself much about dress. “i received the first letter from laurie, who didn’t look as if he knew anything about it,” began meg, without looking up. “mercy, no! don’t ask or tell anyone. shopping in regent street is perfectly splendid. ” “i’m glad of that, jo, for it shows that you are getting on. meg will relish that joke. put him in his bed and leave him, meg. “buy the vases,” whispered amy to laurie, as a final heaping of coals of fire on her enemy’s head. don’t think i’m horrid. laurence’s ruddy face changed suddenly, and he sat down, with a troubled glance at the picture of a handsome man, which hung over his table. a white hat and blue feather, a muslin dress to match, and the loveliest mantle you ever saw. on one side was an old, brown house, looking rather bare and shabby, robbed of the vines that in summer covered its walls and the flowers, which then surrounded it. there doesn’t seem to be anything to hold on to when mother’s gone, so i’m all at sea. ” “don’t go. and that night when she went to her room after a blissful evening of family counsels, hopes, and plans, her heart was so full of happiness that she could only calm it by kneeling beside the empty bed always near her own, and thinking tender thoughts of beth. “do you really mean that?” he asked anxiously, following her as she walked away. we stopped there by the way, and there was no getting my wife out of their clutches. you must go to bed, and not trouble poor mamma. everybody declared that there never had been such a perfect day or such a jolly set to enjoy it, and everyone gave themselves up to the simple pleasures of the hour as freely as if there were no such things as care or sorrow in the world. she showed him her ball book with demure satisfaction when he strolled instead of rushed up to claim her for the next, a glorious polka redowa. “my castle was the most nearly realized of all. ” “please choose to learn, meg. meg sat upon her cushion, sewing daintily with her white hands, and looking as fresh and sweet as a rose in her pink dress among the green. the first one who is affianced will have the pearls, madame has said it, and i have a fancy that the little turquoise ring will be given to you when you go, for madame approves your good behavior and charming manners. lifting his hand to his head, the absent-minded professor gravely felt and removed the little cocked hat, looked at it a minute, and then threw back his head and laughed like a merry bass viol. ” “well, i’ve left two stories with a newspaperman, and he’s to give his answer next week,” whispered jo, in her confidant’s ear. they will feel that more than angry speeches or huffy actions, won’t they, marmee?” “that’s the right spirit, my dear. round shoulders had jo, big hands and feet, a flyaway look to her clothes, and the uncomfortable appearance of a girl who was rapidly shooting up into a woman and didn’t like it. ” “your face will, if your tongue won’t. “i don’t ask you to go alone. ” there was no answer except her sister’s cheek against her own, not even tears, for when most deeply moved, jo did not cry. i rather liked it,” said laurie, looking mischievous, a thing he had not done for a fortnight. she missed her mother’s help to understand and rule herself, but having been taught where to look, she did her best to find the way and walk in it confidingly. “oh, yes!” said jo, and he was quite satisfied, for she folded both hands over his arm, and looked up at him with an expression that plainly showed how happy she would be to walk through life beside him, even though she had no better shelter than the old umbrella, if he carried it. she tried not to be envious or discontented, but it was very natural that the young girl should long for pretty things, gay friends, accomplishments, and a happy life. if she suspected this, she would have shut up tight, and been more prickly than ever, fortunately she wasn’t thinking about herself, so when the time came, down she dropped. bhaer came, jo neglected her playfellows, and dismay and desolation fell upon their little souls. he was called before the curtain, and with great propriety appeared, leading hagar, whose singing was considered more wonderful than all the rest of the performance put together. to jo i leave my breastpin, the one mended with sealing wax, also my bronze inkstand—she lost the cover—and my most precious plaster rabbit, because i am sorry i burned up her story. s. amy hastily shook out half a dozen and laid the rest down before mr. mrs. “yes, please. all the blame of this should have fallen upon jo, for her naughty imitation had been too lifelike to escape detection, and the frolicsome lambs had permitted the joke to escape. she also allowed her to roam about the great house, and examine the curious and pretty things stored away in the big wardrobes and the ancient chests, for aunt march hoarded like a magpie. “i do think that families are the most beautiful things in all the world!” burst out jo, who was in an unusually up-lifted frame of mind just then. march, as she kissed one dear little face after the other, and hurried into the carriage. ” “don’t cry, dear! what did you do?” “i just sat and held it softly till mrs. then you’d dash out as an heiress, scorn everyone who has slighted you, go abroad, and come home my lady something in a blaze of splendor and elegance. “she rides splendidly. “mercy on us, this will never do,” thought jo, adding aloud, “go and sing to me. talking wearied her, faces troubled her, pain claimed her for its own, and her tranquil spirit was sorrowfully perturbed by the ills that vexed her feeble flesh. bhaer came in with some newspapers for mrs. “i hope she won’t. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. i shall sift the matter to the bottom, and put a stop to such pranks at once. a universal shriek arose as the russet boots waved wildly from the wreck and a golden head emerged, exclaiming, “i told you so! i told you so!” with wonderful presence of mind, don pedro, the cruel sire, rushed in, dragged out his daughter, with a hasty aside. “it’s good advice, you’d better take it and save your fingers,” she said, thinking her speech amused him. at any rate she deserved both. she was mortally afraid of being laughed at for surrendering, after her many and vehement declarations of independence. “i did after a while, not to ‘mess’ but to learn of hannah how things should be done, that my servants need not laugh at me. ” “couldn’t you do it now?” asked laurie, so suggestively that jo shut the gate in his face with inhospitable haste, and called through the bars, “go away, teddy, i’m busy. 5. “i think anxiety is very interesting,” observed amy, eating sugar pensively. ” great applause as mr. jo couldn’t even lose her heart in a decorous manner, but sternly tried to quench her feelings, and failing to do so, led a somewhat agitated life. did you hear us?” “no, but it was very rude. chester. he patted her back soothingly, and finding that she was recovering, followed it up by a bashful kiss or two, which brought jo round at once. laurie felt this instinctively and laid himself down again, with a sense of disappointment which he could not explain. “so well that i wish we might always pull in the same boat. i’d have told my part of the scrape, if i could without bringing meg in. it caught in the window, the tower tottered, leaned forward, fell with a crash, and buried the unhappy lovers in the ruins. brooke looked as if his lovely castle in the air was tumbling about his ears, for he had never seen meg in such a mood before, and it rather bewildered him. as the years went on, two little lads of her own came to increase her happiness—rob, named for grandpa, and teddy, a happy-go-lucky baby, who seemed to have inherited his papa’s sunshiny temper as well as his mother’s lively spirit. here they are, please take them, and forgive me if i was hasty in carrying them away last night. such trifles do escape the editorial mind, it is said. ” “father and mother don’t think so. he was handsomer than ever and greatly improved, she thought, but now that the flush of pleasure at meeting her was over, he looked tired and spiritless—not sick, nor exactly unhappy, but older and graver than a year or two of prosperous life should have made him. “that’s nothing. he looked like an italian, was dressed like an englishman, and had the independent air of an american—a combination which caused sundry pairs of feminine eyes to look approvingly after him, and sundry dandies in black velvet suits, with rose-colored neckties, buff gloves, and orange flowers in their buttonholes, to shrug their shoulders, and then envy him his inches. her older sisters were very fine young ladies, and one was engaged, which was extremely interesting and romantic, meg thought. i think of them, but it takes too much time to do them, so i wait for a chance to confer a great favor, and let the small ones slip, but they tell best in the end, i fancy. “quite safe, dear. she bruised her hands with hammering, and got cold working in a draft, which last affliction filled her with apprehensions for the morrow. she wished beth could hear him, but she did not say so, only praised him till he was quite abashed, and his grandfather came to his rescue. my sister, meg, used to ride when papa was rich, but we don’t keep any horses now, except ellen tree,” added amy, laughing. “yes, it is. a restless spirit possessed her, and the old feeling came again, not bitter as it once was, but a sorrowfully patient wonder why one sister should have all she asked, the other nothing. “well, we can’t have it, so don’t let us grumble but shoulder our bundles and trudge along as cheerfully as marmee does. john quietly set apart a little sum, that he might enjoy the pleasure of keeping the invalid supplied with the fruit she loved and longed for. there was the garnet set which aunt march wore when she came out, the pearls her father gave her on her wedding day, her lover’s diamonds, the jet mourning rings and pins, the queer lockets, with portraits of dead friends and weeping willows made of hair inside, the baby bracelets her one little daughter had worn, uncle march’s big watch, with the red seal so many childish hands had played with, and in a box all by itself lay aunt march’s wedding ring, too small now for her fat finger, but put carefully away like the most precious jewel of them all. oh, let me do something!” cried the boy, hurrying from the next room whither he had withdrawn, feeling that their first sorrow was too sacred for even his friendly eyes to see. the girls listened with interest, for the tale was romantic, and somewhat pathetic, as most of the characters died in the end. my bread is riz, so no more at this time. poor meg seldom complained, but a sense of injustice made her feel bitter toward everyone sometimes, for she had not yet learned to know how rich she was in the blessings which alone can make life happy. beth has grown slender, pale, and more quiet than ever. from her jo learned it, and liked it all the better because mr. dirty old hole, isn’t it?” he added, with a look of disgust as they drove along the boulevard to the place napoleon in the old city. but she certainly did grow a little pale and pensive that spring, lost much of her relish for society, and went out sketching alone a good deal. mrs. “i know! i know! you’re going to the theater to see the _seven castles!_” she cried, adding resolutely, “and i shall go, for mother said i might see it, and i’ve got my rag money, and it was mean not to tell me in time. ” “which side won the last match, teddy?” inquired jo, who persisted in feeling an interest in manly sports despite her nineteen years. never mind what happened just after that, for the full hearts overflowed, washing away the bitterness of the past and leaving only the sweetness of the present. i shan’t let anyone see you till you are done, and then we’ll burst upon them like cinderella and her godmother going to the ball,” said belle in her persuasive tone. “what did mother give you out of the treasure box?” asked amy, who had not been present at the opening of a certain cedar chest in which mrs. she was so glad he didn’t hate her for the dreadful things she said, but took them so beautifully and was kinder than ever. that music has taken the vanity out of me as rome took it out of her, and i won’t be a humbug any longer. mercy on us, what are the children thinking of?” and jo looked as much scandalized as if amy and little parker were not yet in their teens. it’s so boyish!” “that’s why i do it. it would have been bad enough to go to her seat, and see the pitying faces of her friends, or the satisfied ones of her few enemies, but to face the whole school, with that shame fresh upon her, seemed impossible, and for a second she felt as if she could only drop down where she stood, and break her heart with crying. you are as cool and soft as snow. there were slow boys and bashful boys, feeble boys and riotous boys, boys that lisped and boys that stuttered, one or two lame ones, and a merry little quadroon, who could not be taken in elsewhere, but who was welcome to the ‘bhaer-garten’, though some people predicted that his admission would ruin the school. “how nice my handkerchiefs look, don’t they? hannah washed and ironed them for me, and i marked them all myself,” said beth, looking proudly at the somewhat uneven letters which had cost her such labor. jo did not cry, though she was very near it once, and was only saved from a demonstration by the consciousness that laurie was staring fixedly at her, with a comical mixture of merriment and emotion in his wicked black eyes. taking no more notice of her than if she had been a fly, mr. she sent this didactic gem to several markets, but it found no purchaser, and she was inclined to agree with mr. ” “how good it sounds to hear you say ‘teddy’! no one ever calls me that but you,” and laurie sat down with an air of great content. each wore a large, flapping hat, a brown linen pouch slung over one shoulder, and carried a long staff. at teatime they compared notes, and all agreed that it had been a delightful, though unusually long day. “yes, i did!” and meg hid her face again, overcome with shame. march than if it had given back the rosy roundness of her youth. “don’t you remember the day you played rarey with puck, and we all looked on? meg and beth were frightened, but jo clapped and pranced, and i sat on the fence and drew you. i don’t want to take what you call ‘a sensible view’. i’m homely and awkward and odd and old, and you’d be ashamed of me, and we should quarrel—we can’t help it even now, you see—and i shouldn’t like elegant society and you would, and you’d hate my scribbling, and i couldn’t get on without it, and we should be unhappy, and wish we hadn’t done it, and everything would be horrid!” “anything more?” asked laurie, finding it hard to listen patiently to this prophetic burst. he did his best and did it manfully, but i don’t think he found that a pair of rampant boys, a pipe, or even the divine plato, were very satisfactory substitutes for wife and child at home. perhaps curiosity might have conquered resentment, if beth had not been there to inquire and receive a glowing description of the play. “that is perfectly natural, and quite harmless, if the liking does not become a passion and lead one to do foolish or unmaidenly things. i don’t think the parian psyche laurie gave lost any of its beauty because john put up the bracket it stood upon, that any upholsterer could have draped the plain muslin curtains more gracefully than amy’s artistic hand, or that any store-room was ever better provided with good wishes, merry words, and happy hopes than that in which jo and her mother put away meg’s few boxes, barrels, and bundles, and i am morally certain that the spandy new kitchen never could have looked so cozy and neat if hannah had not arranged every pot and pan a dozen times over, and laid the fire all ready for lighting the minute ‘mis. i’ve wanted it so long,” said jo, who was a bookworm. amy protested that she would not go, and meg left her in despair to ask hannah what should be done. with the wreck of her frail body, beth’s soul grew strong, and though she said little, those about her felt that she was ready, saw that the first pilgrim called was likewise the fittest, and waited with her on the shore, trying to see the shining ones coming to receive her when she crossed the river. a knot of heads gathered about her, and amy strained her ears to hear what was going on, for broken sentences filled her with curiosity, and frequent peals of laughter made her wild to share the fun. i just wish, though, instead of peeping, you’d come over and see us. you have played so many pranks that i am afraid you have had a hand in this. she never saw laurie mount guard in the hall to warn the servants away. “‘your humble servant, james laurence’. march. the dustpan society will meet on wednesday next, and parade in the upper story of the club house. and here’s a note,” put in the maid, holding it to meg. ” “i thought so. ” “yet you told him to go, mother, and didn’t cry when he went, and never complain now, or seem as if you needed any help,” said jo, wondering. i didn’t envy her then, for i felt that millions of carnelian rings wouldn’t have made me happy after that. march is doing more for him than we can. i’m sure it would do you good, and please us very much. ” then she opened her new book and began to read. ” “and i thought you loved him, beth, and i went away because i couldn’t,” cried jo, glad to say all the truth. of course, she was the first to speak—intelligibly, i mean, for the emotional remarks which followed her impetuous “oh, yes!” were not of a coherent or reportable character. laurie’s a nice boy and i like him, and i won’t have any sentimental stuff about compliments and such rubbish. no one was very near, and running up to examine, he gave it a sly nudge with his toe, which put it just an inch on the right side. as beth had hoped, the ‘tide went out easily’, and in the dark hour before dawn, on the bosom where she had drawn her first breath, she quietly drew her last, with no farewell but one loving look, one little sigh. now then, young brooke, pitch into a man of your own size, will you?” cried laurie, delighted with a poke in the face from a tiny fist, flapping aimlessly about. ” “not a word, unless you let me come in my old place, and promise not to barricade. ” and having delivered her defiance all on one breath, meg cast away her pinafore and precipitately left the field to bemoan herself in her own room. jo liked his good breeding, and didn’t mind having a laugh at aunt march, so she gave him a lively description of the fidgety old lady, her fat poodle, the parrot that talked spanish, and the library where she reveled. i drink your health, dear. try it. “jo, run to the rooms, and tell mrs. straws show which way the wind blows, and i’ve made several discoveries today. i should think she’d hate to poke herself where she isn’t wanted,” said jo crossly, for she disliked the trouble of overseeing a fidgety child when she wanted to enjoy herself. brooke had prepared for meg’s first home. ” and jo brought the visit to an end, feeling more strongly than ever that calls did have a bad effect upon her constitution. don’t cry, dear, but just exert yourself a bit, and fix us up something to eat. “there’s the rumble, they’re coming! i’ll go onto the porch and meet them. watch yourself, be the first to ask pardon if you both err, and guard against the little piques, misunderstandings, and hasty words that often pave the way for bitter sorrow and regret. “you can go, miss march,” said mr. ” “what happens then, a ball?” “a christmas party at our hotel. k. well, then uncle and aunt were there to play propriety. i need something of the sort to keep me steady. she used to practice mounting, holding the reins, and sitting straight on an old saddle in a tree. ” “so it is!” cried laurie, who was playing chess in a corner with jo. ” “but you will be, if he comes back and goes properly down on his knees, won’t you?” “very likely. he keeps his grandson shut up, when he isn’t riding or walking with his tutor, and makes him study very hard. kirke has told her about us, and she does it out of kindness to me. brooke suddenly remembered that mr. it takes two flints to make a fire. it didn’t matter so much when you were a little girl, but now you are so tall, and turn up your hair, you should remember that you are a young lady. march’s motherly welcome, their cheerful society, and the comfort he took in that humble home of theirs. chapter eighteen dark days beth did have the fever, and was much sicker than anyone but hannah and the doctor suspected. “here’s a lovely flock of lambs all lying down,” says amy. how much has happened since i said that! it seems a year ago,” answered meg, who was in a blissful dream lifted far above such common things as bread and butter. ambitious girls have a hard time, laurie, and often have to see youth, health, and precious opportunities go by, just for want of a little help at the right minute. don’t fret about father, dear,” she added, as they parted. jo smothered a laugh at the sudden change, and when someone gave a modest tap, opened the door with a grim aspect which was anything but hospitable. there was only a comfortable glow that warmed and did him good without putting him into a fever, and he was reluctantly obliged to confess that the boyish passion was slowly subsiding into a more tranquil sentiment, very tender, a little sad and resentful still, but that was sure to pass away in time, leaving a brotherly affection which would last unbroken to the end. ” (here the listeners stole sly looks at one another, and began to sew diligently. “i haven’t heard frank laugh so much for ever so long,” said grace to amy, as they sat discussing dolls and making tea sets out of the acorn cups. please don’t forget amy’s napkin. “to you and your sisters. ” the old lady wouldn’t speak to them for a time, but happening to meet jo at a friend’s, something in her comical face and blunt manners struck the old lady’s fancy, and she proposed to take her for a companion. poor jo would gladly have gone under the table, as one thing after another was tasted and left, while amy giggled, meg looked distressed, miss crocker pursed her lips, and laurie talked and laughed with all his might to give a cheerful tone to the festive scene. a peal of laughter from jo, amy, mrs. he did look round, came back, put his arms about her as she stood on the step above him, and looked up at her with a face that made his short appeal eloquent and pathetic. the commander in chief and his aides soon spread the tablecloth with an inviting array of eatables and drinkables, prettily decorated with green leaves. i will confess, though, i felt queer when i saw the dear old hair laid out on the table, and felt only the short rough ends of my head. during one of her play hours she wrote out the important document as well as she could, with some help from esther as to certain legal terms, and when the good-natured frenchwoman had signed her name, amy felt relieved and laid it by to show laurie, whom she wanted as a second witness. grasshoppers skipped briskly in the sere grass, and crickets chirped like fairy pipers at a feast. ” “i don’t like that sort of thing. u. “i should be ashamed of myself if i didn’t. he is well, and thinks he shall get through the cold season better than we feared. but her faith in the good spot which exists in the heart of the naughtiest, sauciest, most tantalizing little ragamuffin gave her patience, skill, and in time success, for no mortal boy could hold out long with father bhaer shining on him as benevolently as the sun, and mother bhaer forgiving him seventy times seven. sitting on the floor with one boot on, amy began to cry and meg to reason with her, when laurie called from below, and the two girls hurried down, leaving their sister wailing. cornelius’s receipt book as if it were a mathematical exercise, working out the problems with patience and care. ” and miss kate strolled away, adding to herself with a shrug, “i didn’t come to chaperone a governess, though she is young and pretty. ” “i hate it! nothing but grinding or skylarking. but when their first sorrow was over—for they loved the old lady in spite of her sharp tongue—they found they had cause for rejoicing, for she had left plumfield to jo, which made all sorts of joyful things possible. “there isn’t any, laurie is only a little boy. but she can pet and comfort him after i’m gone, and so cure him of this romantic notion. think over mother’s preachment, act upon it if it seems good, and god bless you all. but even that refuge proved unavailing, for he was delivered over to the enemy, with a “be gentle with him, john,” which struck the culprit with dismay, for when mamma deserted him, then the judgment day was at hand. “don’t talk that way, turn over a new leaf and begin again, teddy, my son. to examine and arrange these things gave amy great satisfaction, especially the jewel cases, in which on velvet cushions reposed the ornaments which had adorned a belle forty years ago. fred laughed when i spoke of jo, and sent his ‘respectful compliments to the big hat’. i’ll make him!” and she shook her head threateningly at the picture of the mischievous-looking boy laughing at her from the wall. within lie snoods that bound her hair, slippers that have danced their last, faded flowers laid by with care, fans whose airy toils are past, gay valentines, all ardent flames, trifles that have borne their part in girlish hopes and fears and shames, the record of a maiden heart now learning fairer, truer spells, hearing, like a blithe refrain, the silver sound of bridal bells in the falling summer rain. ” “no, you won’t!” cried jo, hugging her close, with a frightened look. you go to a private one, i suppose?” “i don’t go at all. ” “what silly questions you ask!” and jo gave a disdainful shrug as the rest laughed at laurie’s matter-of-fact tone. ” this odd arrangement made mrs. here lies pip march, who died the 7th of june; loved and lamented sore, and not forgotten soon. jo chapter thirty-four friend though very happy in the social atmosphere about her, and very busy with the daily work that earned her bread and made it sweeter for the effort, jo still found time for literary labors. “i was worried at first and meant to tell you, then i remembered how you liked mr. i wish fred was dark, for i don’t fancy light men, however, the vaughns are very rich and come of an excellent family, so i won’t find fault with their yellow hair, as my own is yellower. ” “so i did, beth. bless my heart, i never thought of such a thing!” with praiseworthy discretion, the good lady said nothing, and betrayed no sign of enlightenment, but cordially urged laurie to stay and begged amy to enjoy his society, for it would do her more good than so much solitude. the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. but it does seem so nice to have little suppers and bouquets, and go to parties, and drive home, and read and rest, and not work. ” “quel nom a cette jeune demoiselle en les pantoufles jolis?” “how nicely you do it! let me see. well, if anything happened, you know. “after doing the civil all round, and airing our best bonnet, we shall astonish you by the elegant hospitalities of our mansion, the brilliant society we shall draw about us, and the beneficial influence we shall exert over the world at large. for now the sun seemed to have gone in as suddenly as it came out, and the world grew muddy and miserable again, and for the first time she discovered that her feet were cold, her head ached, and that her heart was colder than the former, fuller of pain than the latter. ” and away he went, in a great hurry. thanks to this inspiration, he got on swimmingly for a time, but gradually the work lost its charm, and he forgot to compose, while he sat musing, pen in hand, or roamed about the gay city to get some new ideas and refresh his mind, which seemed to be in a somewhat unsettled state that winter. touched to the heart, mrs. i should think you’d have known mr. advertisements miss oranthy bluggage, the accomplished strong-minded lecturer, will deliver her famous lecture on “woman and her position” at pickwick hall, next saturday evening, after the usual performances. “we shall see. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at www. “it wasn’t fair to tell a man to bring folks home any time, with perfect freedom, and when he took you at your word, to flame up and blame him, and leave him in the lurch, to be laughed at or pitied. as no one appeared but an inquisitive daddy-longlegs, who examined her work with interest, she went to walk, got caught in a shower, and came home dripping. at the kings’ today i found everybody in a flurry, and one of the children said that her oldest brother had done something dreadful, and papa had sent him away. brooke for his faithful care of her husband, at which mr. in a minute a hand came down over the page, so that she could not draw, and laurie’s voice said, with a droll imitation of a penitent child, “i will be good, oh, i will be good!” but amy did not laugh, for she was in earnest, and tapping on the outspread hand with her pencil, said soberly, “aren’t you ashamed of a hand like that? it’s as soft and white as a woman’s, and looks as if it never did anything but wear jouvin’s best gloves and pick flowers for ladies. come at once. ” “that’s just the feeling i had, though i couldn’t express it. then distorting his pockets with knobby bundles, and giving her the flowers to hold, he put up the old umbrella, and they traveled on again. her story was as full of desperation and despair as her limited acquaintance with those uncomfortable emotions enabled her to make it, and having located it in lisbon, she wound up with an earthquake, as a striking and appropriate denouement. make it sweet and swift and strong, spirit, answer now my song! a soft strain of music sounded, and then at the back of the cave appeared a little figure in cloudy white, with glittering wings, golden hair, and a garland of roses on its head. bhaer ‘couldn’t tell a lie’, so he gave the somewhat vague reply that he believed they did sometimes, in a tone that made mr. yours respectful, hannah mullet head nurse of ward no. “i always go early, i do, truly! please let me take you home. ” “the crop we are going to raise is a profitable one,” and jo laughed. “ought they to smoke like that?” asked beth from her perch on the bed. a quick temper, sharp tongue, and restless spirit were always getting her into scrapes, and her life was a series of ups and downs, which were both comic and pathetic. ” “you have heard all that has come lately. “go after them. very precious to jo was the friendship of the lads, their penitent sniffs and whispers after wrongdoing, their droll or touching little confidences, their pleasant enthusiasms, hopes, and plans, even their misfortunes, for they only endeared them to her all the more. c. “oh, indeed!” said annie with a funny look, as meg slipped the note into her pocket as a sort of talisman against envy, vanity, and false pride, for the few loving words had done her good, and the flowers cheered her up by their beauty. now i take it all back, for i don’t think you half so nice as when i left you at home. till now she had done well, been prudent and exact, kept her little account books neatly, and showed them to him monthly without fear. she had not the heart to refuse her splendid, successful boy anything, and answered warmly. ” “let me mend them,” said i. her efforts in this line, however, were brought to an abrupt close by an untoward accident, which quenched her ardor. i’ll go and hear the fun, and have a good laugh over it. i long to see you all, and in spite of my nonsense am, as ever, your loving. ” “i don’t mind,” laughed laurie, as he settled his tie. to my friend and neighbor theodore laurence i bequeethe my paper mashay portfolio, my clay model of a horse though he did say it hadn’t any neck. it’s not half so sensible to leave legacies when one dies as it is to use the money wisely while alive, and enjoy making one’s fellow creatures happy with it. there was nothing he didn’t offer, from his own dressing gown to himself as escort. it’s grand fun and will straighten you up capitally. “illusion. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal revenue service. chapter fifteen a telegram “november is the most disagreeable month in the whole year,” said margaret, standing at the window one dull afternoon, looking out at the frostbitten garden. bhaer could not go down upon his knees, on account of the mud. to be sure, the hall was so narrow it was fortunate that they had no piano, for one never could have been got in whole, the dining room was so small that six people were a tight fit, and the kitchen stairs seemed built for the express purpose of precipitating both servants and china pell-mell into the coalbin. it would do me so much good, and be so altogether splendid. t. whether they like it or not, they are virtually put upon the shelf as soon as the wedding excitement is over, and most of them might exclaim, as did a very pretty woman the other day, “i’m as handsome as ever, but no one takes any notice of me because i’m married. chapter forty-five daisy and demi i cannot feel that i have done my duty as humble historian of the march family, without devoting at least one chapter to the two most precious and important members of it. “i’m sorry for that, and ought to thank him for not shaking me, i suppose. ” “yes, she does it very prettily, and never seems to go too far. laurence watches over us like a motherly old hen, as jo says, and laurie is very kind and neighborly. it’s amy. it’s very curious, but the more i try to satisfy myself with all sorts of natural affections, the more i seem to want. it came at last, and settled his mind effectually on one point, for jo decidedly couldn’t and wouldn’t. beth, comfort yourself with your music, and be faithful to the little home duties, and you, amy, help all you can, be obedient, and keep happy safe at home. they have been very kind to me in many ways, and i am grateful, for they are all rich and i know i am poor, yet they never made any difference. ” “you see, grandpa lives among his books, and doesn’t mind much what happens outside. wealth is certainly a most desirable thing, but poverty has its sunny side, and one of the sweet uses of adversity is the genuine satisfaction which comes from hearty work of head or hand, and to the inspiration of necessity, we owe half the wise, beautiful, and useful blessings of the world. ” “and you won’t tease me in private?” “i never tease. bhaer looking down. “he’s showing you how your john will go on by-and-by. we call this hill the delectable mountain, for we can look far away and see the country where we hope to live some time. ” the twins pranced behind, feeling that the millennium was at hand, for everyone was so busy with the newcomers that they were left to revel at their own sweet will, and you may be sure they made the most of the opportunity. you will get on the best, but i shall have the liveliest time of it. amen. but she says it has been a hard week for her, so we mustn’t grumble but take care of ourselves. don’t you wish you could give it to me, laurie?” and she slyly smiled in his disappointed face. i only loved you all the more, and i worked hard to please you, and i gave up billiards and everything you didn’t like, and waited and never complained, for i hoped you’d love me, though i’m not half good enough. “you can’t say nothing pleasant ever happens now, can you, meg?” said amy, trying to decide how she would group the lovers in a sketch she was planning to make. meg’s had roses and heliotrope, myrtle, and a little orange tree in it. laurence hooked up a big fish with the crooked end of his cane and held it out to her. i may be a little late, but i shall surely come. “if i only had a silk!” sighed meg. ” “it shall be stopped, your tide must not turn so soon, nineteen is too young, beth. laurie smiled, but he liked the spirit with which she took up a new purpose when a long-cherished one died, and spent no time lamenting. pausing to turn a page, the lad saw her looking and, with boyish good nature offered half his paper, saying bluntly, “want to read it? that’s a first-rate story. by the time amy came in, jo was able to take her part in the family jubilation, not quite as heartily as usual, perhaps, but without repinings at amy’s good fortune. jo—bad. davis knew any quantity of greek, latin, algebra, and ologies of all sorts so he was called a fine teacher, and manners, morals, feelings, and examples were not considered of any particular importance. good morning, sir. “then let me advise you to take up your little burdens again, for though they seem heavy sometimes, they are good for us, and lighten as we learn to carry them. a whole fortnight of fun will be regularly splendid,” replied jo, looking like a windmill as she folded skirts with her long arms. tell us all about it,” cried mr. i’m the wretch that did it, sir,” said the new member, with a welleresque nod to mr. hide the basket, quick!” cried jo, as a door slammed and steps sounded in the hall. ” “not very. don’t take off your apron, whatever you do, it’s peculiarly becoming,” said laurie, as jo bestowed his especial aversion in her capacious pocket and offered her arm to support his feeble steps. brooke and wet-blanketed by mrs. “why, i owe at least a dozen pickled limes, and i can’t pay them, you know, till i have money, for marmee forbade my having anything charged at the shop. sallie has some girls staying with her. m. but night came at last, and every time the clock struck, the sisters, still sitting on either side of the bed, looked at each other with brightening eyes, for each hour brought help nearer. it was dreadful, but she would have done it if the flock of draggle-tailed sparrows on the hedge had been human beings, for she was very far gone indeed, and quite regardless of everything but her own happiness. ashamed of his momentary pique, laurie squeezed the kind little hand, and said frankly, “i’m the one to be forgiven. “no, thank you, except call at the office, if you’ll be so kind, dear. i give you my word for it. one thing, however, rather quenched the vanities. the minute he was put into bed on one side, he rolled out on the other, and made for the door, only to be ignominiously caught up by the tail of his little toga and put back again, which lively performance was kept up till the young man’s strength gave out, when he devoted himself to roaring at the top of his voice. it had evidently been newly tuned and put in apple-pie order, but, perfect as it was, i think the real charm lay in the happiest of all happy faces which leaned over it, as beth lovingly touched the beautiful black and white keys and pressed the bright pedals. oh, children, children, help me to bear it!” for several minutes there was nothing but the sound of sobbing in the room, mingled with broken words of comfort, tender assurances of help, and hopeful whispers that died away in tears. is teddy studying so hard that he can’t find time to write to his friends? take good care of him for me, beth, and tell me all about the babies, and give heaps of love to everyone. i’m sure there is something on her mind, and i want you to discover what it is. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those provided in paragraph 1. wonder how old he is?” it was on the tip of jo’s tongue to ask, but she checked herself in time and, with unusual tact, tried to find out in a round-about way. “no need of that. i’ve a great mind to go over and tell the old gentleman so!” the idea amused jo, who liked to do daring things and was always scandalizing meg by her queer performances. when the parting came he affected high spirits, to conceal certain inconvenient emotions which seemed inclined to assert themselves. rich people’s children often need care and comfort, as well as poor. bhaer was nick bottom, and tina was titania, a perfect little fairy in his arms. we heard about henshaw and all you did for him. “you read it! i can’t, i feel so queer! oh, it is too lovely!” and beth hid her face in jo’s apron, quite upset by her present. are limes the fashion now? it used to be pricking bits of rubber to make balls. ” amy was on the point of crying, but laurie slyly pulled the parrot’s tail, which caused polly to utter an astonished croak and call out, “bless my boots!” in such a funny way, that she laughed instead. if her face was turned homeward, he had merely strolled down to see the river, and was just returning, unless they were tired of his frequent calls. letters from several persons, whose praise was honor, followed the appearance of the little story, newspapers copied it, and strangers as well as friends admired it. i only wish we may all keep well and be together, nothing else. i had been sitting near this door, finishing off the last sock, and trying to understand what he said to a new scholar, who is as stupid as i am. “what a queer smell! it’s like burned feathers,” observed amy, smoothing her own pretty curls with a superior air. amy teased jo, and jo irritated amy, and semioccasional explosions occurred, of which both were much ashamed afterward. “mother says i may when i’m eighteen perhaps, but two years is an everlasting time to wait. “perhaps also a shawl for tina’s mother, she is so poor and sick, and the husband is such a care. mr. ” that was altogether too much from a lad younger than herself, and meg walked away, saying petulantly, “you are the rudest boy i ever saw. she likes it, and it won’t cost much, so i’ll have some left to buy my pencils,” added amy. she’s nothing but a doll tonight. cutter if he would let her do some scrubbing for a bit of fish, because she hadn’t any dinner for her children, and had been disappointed of a day’s work. miss jo owes me one, so you are finished,” cried fred excitedly, as they all drew near to see the finish. i’ll help you with the hard words, and they’ll explain things if we don’t understand,” whispered beth, very much impressed by the pretty books and her sisters’ example. “you’re a perfect cherub! now put on all your best things, and i’ll tell you how to behave at each place, so that you will make a good impression. but now, thanks to my good old aunt, who loved me better than i ever deserved, i’m rich, at least i feel so, and we can live at plumfield perfectly well, if we have a flourishing school. a dreadful fear passed coldly over jo, as she thought, “beth is dead, and meg is afraid to tell me. now, my children, let the play end. the gruff voice was gruffer than ever, as the old gentleman said abruptly, after the dreadful pause, “so you’re not afraid of me, hey?” “not much, sir. ” “we have got to get by the lions first,” said jo, as if she rather liked the prospect. i like your nice manners and refined ways of speaking, when you don’t try to be elegant. but there came a time when laurie ceased to worship at many shrines, hinted darkly at one all-absorbing passion, and indulged occasionally in byronic fits of gloom. on returning for the third time, jo gave herself a shake, pulled her hat over her eyes, and walked up the stairs, looking as if she were going to have all her teeth out. i’m sure it’s the least i can do when you have been so kind, lending me things and helping me get ready,” said meg, glancing round the room at the very simple outfit, which seemed nearly perfect in their eyes. a good deal of hammering went on before the curtain rose again, but when it became evident what a masterpiece of stage carpentery had been got up, no one murmured at the delay. it also touched her, and she showed that it did, by the cordial tone in which she said. ” chapter twenty-one laurie makes mischief, and jo makes peace jo’s face was a study next day, for the secret rather weighed upon her, and she found it hard not to look mysterious and important. “i can’t get any lobsters, so you will have to do without salad today,” said mr. oh dear! how can girls like to have lovers and refuse them? i think it’s dreadful. i hate to wait, so if you mean ever to do it, make haste and have it over quickly,” said jo pettishly. ” “no, dear, but speaking of father reminded me how much i miss him, how much i owe him, and how faithfully i should watch and work to keep his little daughters safe and good for him. laurie meanwhile posted off to comfort amy, and told his story so well that aunt march actually ‘sniffed’ herself, and never once said “i told you so”. we’ve each got a dollar, and the army wouldn’t be much helped by our giving that. he had rather imagined that the denoument would take place in the chateau garden by moonlight, and in the most graceful and decorous manner, but it turned out exactly the reverse, for the matter was settled on the lake at noonday in a few blunt words. “i may be strong-minded, but no one can say i’m out of my sphere now, for woman’s special mission is supposed to be drying tears and bearing burdens. i can’t help wishing sometimes, that mother and father hadn’t been so particular about such things. he doesn’t like to hear me play. that was only a month to wait, and here was a lovely violet silk going at a bargain, and she had the money, if she only dared to take it. he was grave and pale now, and looked decidedly more like the novel heroes whom she admired, but he neither slapped his forehead nor tramped about the room as they did. “i think they are great nonsense, and i’ll thank you not to be silly and spoil my fun. we each are young, we each have a heart, oh, why should we stand thus coldly apart? he looked at meg with such a lackadaisical expression that she laughed outright and spoiled his song. sherwood, miss edgeworth, and hannah more, and then produced a tale which might have been more properly called an essay or a sermon, so intensely moral was it. we have many most respectable and worthy young women who do the same and are employed by the nobility, because, being the daughters of gentlemen, they are both well bred and accomplished, you know,” said miss kate in a patronizing tone that hurt meg’s pride, and made her work seem not only more distasteful, but degrading. org. it’s lazy laurence. he wishes her to go into a convent, but she won’t hear of it, and after a touching appeal, is about to faint when roderigo dashes in and demands her hand. perfectly resigned to his discharge, he devoted himself to getting well, preparing for business, and earning a home for meg. but what could she do? for the old lady was in the middle of her story, and long before it was done, jo was off again, making more droll revelations and committing still more fearful blunders. “twenty-five yards of silk seems a good deal to cover one small woman, but i’ve no doubt my wife will look as fine as ned moffat’s when she gets it on,” said john dryly. only a rough sketch of laurie taming a horse. the ‘queer feeling’ did not pass away, but she imagined herself acting the new part of fine lady and so got on pretty well, though the tight dress gave her a side-ache, the train kept getting under her feet, and she was in constant fear lest her earrings should fly off and get lost or broken. march said, he was ‘a little gentleman’, and did honor to the coming guest by brushing his curly pate, putting on a fresh color, and trying to tidy up the room, which in spite of half a dozen servants, was anything but neat. ” “now this won’t do,” said john, hardening his heart against the engaging little sinner. ” “dear, how charming! i hope i shall go abroad some day, but i’d rather go to rome than the row,” said amy, who had not the remotest idea what the row was and wouldn’t have asked for the world. “of course we can go, mother? it will be such a help to laurie, for i can row, and meg see to the lunch, and the children be useful in some way. mr. when laurie came home, dead tired but quite composed, his grandfather met him as if he knew nothing, and kept up the delusion very successfully for an hour or two. sleep forsook her eyes, meals stood untasted, day and night were all too short to enjoy the happiness which blessed her only at such times, and made these hours worth living, even if they bore no other fruit. ” but poor jo never got her laugh, for she was transfixed upon the threshold by a spectacle which held her there, staring with her mouth nearly as wide open as her eyes. ” laying her head on her arms, jo wet her little romance with a few happy tears, for she had thought that no one saw and appreciated her efforts to be good, and this assurance was doubly precious, doubly encouraging, because unexpected and from the person whose commendation she most valued. i’m not jealous, dear, do your best, only don’t make a saint of him. “what a dreadful day this has been!” began jo, usually the first to speak. but mothers, sisters, and friends may help to make the crop a small one, and keep many tares from spoiling the harvest, by believing, and showing that they believe, in the possibility of loyalty to the virtues which make men manliest in good women’s eyes. ” meg longed to go and tell mother, but a sense of shame at her own short-comings, of loyalty to john, “who might be cruel, but nobody should know it,” restrained her, and after a summary cleaning up, she dressed herself prettily, and sat down to wait for john to come and be forgiven. when dr. his second wooing, he resolved, should be as calm and simple as possible. whether he did or not, frank will tell you. the lunch looked charming, and as she surveyed it, she sincerely hoped it would taste well, and that the borrowed glass, china, and silver would get safely home again. brooke, who felt at peace with all mankind, even his mischievous pupil. amy especially enjoyed this high honor, and became quite a belle among them, for her ladyship early felt and learned to use the gift of fascination with which she was endowed. 1. ” “oh, my dearest boy, don’t, don’t say that! i forgot you were rich when i said ‘yes’. i comfort myself with that,” said amy with a little quiver in her voice. you wouldn’t have me let that fine fellow work himself to death just for want of a little help, when he is worth a dozen of us lazy chaps, would you?” “of course not, but i don’t see the use of your having seventeen waistcoats, endless neckties, and a new hat every time you come home. ” “do you study in vacation time?” asked jo. he wanted desperately to go to nice, but would not till he was asked, and amy would not ask him, for just then she was having little experiences of her own, which made her rather wish to avoid the quizzical eyes of ‘our boy’. i think i had better go away before it comes to anything. “welcome to camp laurence!” said the young host, as they landed with exclamations of delight. demi, as the oldest grandchild, then presented the queen of the day with various gifts, so numerous that they were transported to the festive scene in a wheelbarrow. jo’s funny hat deserved a vote of thanks, for it was of general utility. brooke, getting a trifle confused as his eyes went from one telltale face to the other. too many sugarplums are not good for him. i like to think he was a little child once, for then i don’t seem so far away, and that helps me. as it was a rainy day, she went upstairs to amuse herself in one of the large chambers, and took polly with her for company. s. i’ll harrrow up your feelings first by asking if you don’t think you are something of a flirt,” said laurie, as jo nodded to fred as a sign that peace was declared. the little book was brought slowly out and laid down before him. laurie said nothing but as his eye went from one to the other, amy saw him flush up and fold his lips together as if he read and accepted the little lesson she had given him. “he knows you have got rich relations, child. ” he could not get any further, for he too turned bashful all of a sudden, and did not quite know what to say. that would be time enough, please god, but laurie must write to her often, and not let her feel lonely, homesick or anxious. ” “nor i. the others paired off as before, and this arrangement left jo companionless. john brooke’, and evidently laboring under the delusion that the whole affair had been brought about by his excellent management. my powers are great, as you shall see, so be easy in your mind, my child. chapter eleven experiments chapter twelve camp laurence chapter thirteen castles in the air chapter fourteen secrets chapter fifteen a telegram chapter sixteen letters chapter seventeen little faithful chapter eighteen dark days chapter nineteen amy’s will chapter twenty confidential chapter twenty-one laurie makes mischief, and jo makes peace chapter twenty-two pleasant meadows chapter twenty-three aunt march settles the question part 2 chapter twenty-four gossip chapter twenty-five the first wedding chapter twenty-six artistic attempts chapter twenty-seven literary lessons chapter twenty-eight domestic experiences chapter twenty-nine calls chapter thirty consequences chapter thirty-one our foreign correspondent chapter thirty-two tender troubles chapter thirty-three jo’s journal chapter thirty-four friend chapter thirty-five heartache chapter thirty-six beth’s secret chapter thirty-seven new impressions chapter thirty-eight on the shelf chapter thirty-nine lazy laurence chapter forty the valley of the shadow chapter forty-one learning to forget chapter forty-two all alone chapter forty-three surprises chapter forty-four my lord and lady chapter forty-five daisy and demi chapter forty-six under the umbrella chapter forty-seven harvest time part 1 chapter one playing pilgrims “christmas won’t be christmas without any presents,” grumbled jo, lying on the rug. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation. i shouldn’t. “she has had a good example before her all her life, my dear,” mr. my dear girls, i am ambitious for you, but not to have you make a dash in the world, marry rich men merely because they are rich, or have splendid houses, which are not homes because love is wanting. ” “beth will pet you. “you must get yourself out of the scrape as you can. meg saw the girls glance at it and then at one another, and her cheeks began to burn, for with all her gentleness she was very proud. the great door flew open, and he beheld. tommy is poor and bashful and good and very clever. “no, nor felt such thorns,” returned laurie, with his thumb in his mouth, after a vain attempt to capture a solitary scarlet flower that grew just beyond his reach. “never,” she answered, with a despondent but decided air. gutenberg. presently the familiar tramp was heard in the dusk, and she ran out to meet him. “name him demijohn, and call him demi for short,” said laurie. the fresh winds blew away desponding doubts, delusive fancies, and moody mists. snodgrass the masked marriage (a tale of venice) gondola after gondola swept up to the marble steps, and left its lovely load to swell the brilliant throng that filled the stately halls of count adelon. as young readers like to know ‘how people look’, we will take this moment to give them a little sketch of the four sisters, who sat knitting away in the twilight, while the december snow fell quietly without, and the fire crackled cheerfully within. march’s face was illuminated to such a degree when she read it that jo and beth, who were with her, demanded what the glad tidings were. such plays and tableaux, such sleigh rides and skating frolics, such pleasant evenings in the old parlor, and now and then such gay little parties at the great house. i’ll supply the money. snowball pat paw. “what richness!” sighed jo, sinking into the depth of a velour chair and gazing about her with an air of intense satisfaction. please let me. much gratified, jo rushed back to tell the good news, and amy looked both touched and surprised by the report of may’s word and manner. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by u. the friendly frankness was disturbed, the sunshine had a shadow over it, and despite their apparent gaiety, there was a secret discontent in the heart of each. “john, dear, i’m ashamed to show you my book, for i’ve really been dreadfully extravagant lately. no gentleman were admitted, so jo played male parts to her heart’s content and took immense satisfaction in a pair of russet leather boots given her by a friend, who knew a lady who knew an actor. ” “i’m sorry. dashwood that morals didn’t sell. ” “you always were my docile daughter. she only said, “thank you, deary,” but something in her face made the girls change the subject, and talk as cheerfully as they could about mr. c. e. they shopped, walked, rode, and called all day, went to theaters and operas or frolicked at home in the evening, for annie had many friends and knew how to entertain them. “where is it? shall i call mother?” “no, no, don’t call her, don’t tell her. as the height of luxury, meg put out some of her sewing, and then found time hang so heavily, that she fell to snipping and spoiling her clothes in her attempts to furbish them up a la moffat. well, i’ll go if i must, and do my best. ’ (i know better than that), and the next asserts that ‘though it is original, and written with great force and feeling, it is a dangerous book. i think well of him, and like to show that i do, for he is a gentleman in spite of the brown paper parcels. at any rate, his skill reminds him of the woman he did not like, and so he ‘glowered’ as jo said. it’s becoming, and you look too sober in your plain suit. ned, being in college, of course put on all the airs which freshmen think it their bounden duty to assume. how splendid it will be to have you doing what you like, and be able to see you often, and the boys!” cried jo, clinging to the lads as an excuse for the satisfaction she could not help betraying. march looked anxious as she put the question. she eats and drinks and sleeps like a sensible creature, she looks straight in my face when i talk about that man, and only blushes a little bit when teddy jokes about lovers. hold on to me, jo, dear!” she could not speak, but she did ‘hold on’, and the warm grasp of the friendly human hand comforted her sore heart, and seemed to lead her nearer to the divine arm which alone could uphold her in her trouble. fame is a very good thing to have in the house, but cash is more convenient, so i wish to take the sense of the meeting on this important subject,” said jo, calling a family council. meg had told her adventures gayly and said over and over what a charming time she had had, but something still seemed to weigh upon her spirits, and when the younger girls were gone to bed, she sat thoughtfully staring at the fire, saying little and looking worried. we planned to come home with the carrols, a month or more ago, but they suddenly changed their minds, and decided to pass another winter in paris. of course the british beat—they always do. jo heard that, but made no answer, except to kiss her mother, and walk rapidly away, thinking with a glow of gratitude, in spite of her heartache, “how good she is to me! what do girls do who haven’t any mothers to help them through their troubles?” the dry-goods stores were not down among the counting-houses, banks, and wholesale warerooms, where gentlemen most do congregate, but jo found herself in that part of the city before she did a single errand, loitering along as if waiting for someone, examining engineering instruments in one window and samples of wool in another, with most unfeminine interest, tumbling over barrels, being half-smothered by descending bales, and hustled unceremoniously by busy men who looked as if they wondered ‘how the deuce she got there’. may i go also, and take for you the bundles?” “yes, thank you. 3. ned was offended and turned to sallie for consolation, saying to her rather pettishly, “there isn’t a bit of flirt in that girl, is there?” “not a particle, but she’s a dear,” returned sallie, defending her friend even while confessing her shortcomings. “as usual, ‘go away, teddy. jo meantime devoted herself to literature and beth, who remained delicate long after the fever was a thing of the past. nobody spoke for a minute; then meg said in an altered tone, “you know the reason mother proposed not having any presents this christmas was because it is going to be a hard winter for everyone; and she thinks we ought not to spend money for pleasure, when our men are suffering so in the army. ” “i shall stay, of course, i’m oldest,” began meg, looking anxious and self-reproachful. “it’s very well, he’s in the rack. very few letters were written in those hard times that were not touching, especially those which fathers sent home. poor little girl, it will be a sad going home for her, i’m afraid,” and laurie opened his desk, as if writing to amy had been the proper conclusion of the sentence left unfinished some weeks before. ” “we do. there, i won’t lecture any more, for i know you’ll wake up and be a man in spite of that hardhearted girl. ” “aunt march, how dare you say such a thing? john is above such meanness, and i won’t listen to you a minute if you talk so,” cried meg indignantly, forgetting everything but the injustice of the old lady’s suspicions. i was just thinking i’d offer to put them back, for they belong to your table rather than mine. ” laurie was signing and sealing as he spoke, and did not look up till a great tear dropped on the paper. ” “i’ll try,” said amy, for the advice suited her, and after a flurry to get ready, she ran after the friends, who were just disappearing over the hill. we forgot about it, till teddy told me that mr. he only remembered that she was young and poor, a girl far away from mother’s love and father’s care, and he was moved to help her with an impulse as quick and natural as that which would prompt him to put out his hand to save a baby from a puddle. “no, but i read all her pieces, and i know a fellow who works in the office where this paper is printed. they both died when laurie was a little child, and then his grandfather took him home. “you haven’t seen my private expense book yet. ” jo heard, but amy was struggling to her feet and did not catch a word. meg smiled and relented, and whispered as they stood waiting to catch the time, “take care my skirt doesn’t trip you up. she’s company, and you ought to stay with her more. mr. i’ve been sick with this cold so long, and shut up, i’m dying for some fun. all the little duties were faithfully done each day, and many of her sisters’ also, for they were forgetful, and the house seemed like a clock whose pendulum was gone a-visiting. “remember!” she said, trying to smile, for the splitting headache had already begun. was he reminding you then?” asked jo softly. was a capital little institution, and flourished wonderfully, for nearly as many queer things passed through it as through the real post office. i’ve seen the plate, the family jewels, the old servants, and pictures of the country place, with its park, great house, lovely grounds, and fine horses. dashwood, who felt a natural desire to know who his new contributor might be. ” “some of it is. “good! and here is where fred vaughn comes in, i fancy. if the laurences had been what jo called ‘prim and poky’, she would not have got on at all, for such people always made her shy and awkward. march looked at one another with an anxious expression, as their eyes followed meg. “aunt march went today, for which, oh, be joyful!” said jo. ” chapter thirty consequences mrs. “not for many months, dear, unless he is sick. let’s each buy what we want, and have a little fun; i’m sure we work hard enough to earn it,” cried jo, examining the heels of her shoes in a gentlemanly manner. ” i went in, and while we worked i looked about me, for it was ‘a den’ to be sure. it was dreadfully improper, i know, but i couldn’t resist the temptation, and lifting one end of the curtain before the glass door, i peeped in. at such times the intruder silently withdrew, and not until the red bow was seen gaily erect upon the gifted brow, did anyone dare address jo. jo never went back to aunt march, for the old lady took such a fancy to amy that she bribed her with the offer of drawing lessons from one of the best teachers going, and for the sake of this advantage, amy would have served a far harder mistress. hannah is a perfect saint. but i want to say one word before we sit down. ” “i’ll be a double distilled saint. then, as if reproaching himself for the longing that he could not repress, he went and kissed the two tousled heads upon the pillow, took down his seldom-used meerschaum, and opened his plato. f. “you won’t care to stay at home now, perhaps?” “i don’t intend to run away from a girl. “see the cunning brackets to hold candles, and the nice green silk, puckered up, with a gold rose in the middle, and the pretty rack and stool, all complete,” added meg, opening the instrument and displaying its beauties. when john got out his books that night, meg’s heart sank, and for the first time in her married life, she was afraid of her husband. “shall i rush into town and demand one?” asked jo, with the magnanimity of a martyr. beth was there, laying the snowy piles smoothly on the shelves and exulting over the goodly array. demi, say good night to mamma, and let her go and rest, for she is very tired with taking care of you all day. she had boys enough now, and did not tire of them, though they were not angels, by any means, and some of them caused both professor and professorin much trouble and anxiety. bhaer—doesn’t like tea. “twelve or fourteen in the class, but i dare say they won’t all come. at any rate, you are none the better for it, as far as i can see. it’s hard enough to have you change all of a sudden. the flights are very long in this tall house, and as i stood waiting at the head of the third one for a little servant girl to lumber up, i saw a gentleman come along behind her, take the heavy hod of coal out of her hand, carry it all the way up, put it down at a door near by, and walk away, saying, with a kind nod and a foreign accent, “it goes better so. so she gave her mornings to duty, her afternoons to pleasure, and prospered finely. come here, amy, and do the fainting scene, for you are as stiff as a poker in that. “‘thankee,’ said the knight politely, as he took a pinch and sneezed seven times so violently that his head fell off. ” “no slang,” snapped jo, slamming down the pillow. ” “you can’t, there is no cure. “he never lets me see his anxiety, but is so sweet and patient with me, so devoted to beth, and such a stay and comfort to me always that i can’t love him enough. “yes, we all do, and love her for being so ready to forgive. aunt says amy, decidedly, and it is not for us to dictate when she offers such a favor. jo and fred had several skirmishes and once narrowly escaped high words. the hot weather made him indolent, and he had shirked his studies, tried mr. mr. as she arranged her table that morning, while the little girls were in the anteroom filling the baskets, she took up her pet production, a little book, the antique cover of which her father had found among his treasures, and in which on leaves of vellum she had beautifully illuminated different texts. what did the little mary say to that?” asked mr. ” here the lecture began, but jo heard very little of it, for while professor sands was prosing away about belzoni, cheops, scarabei, and hieroglyphics, she was covertly taking down the address of the paper, and boldly resolving to try for the hundred-dollar prize offered in its columns for a sensational story. then she slept again, and the girls waited upon their mother, for she would not unclasp the thin hand which clung to hers even in sleep. she felt her exile deeply, and for the first time in her life, realized how much she was beloved and petted at home. “prime, isn’t it?” asked the boy, as her eye went down the last paragraph of her portion. bless you, beth! what a refreshing spectacle you are, jo. fred is very entertaining, and is altogether the most agreeable young man i ever knew—except laurie, whose manners are more charming. jo doos beat all for goin ahead, but she don’t stop to cal’k’late fust, and you never know where she’s like to bring up. 2. one small child was poking turtles with amy’s cherished parasol, a second was eating gingerbread over jo’s best bonnet, and a third playing ball with her gloves, but all were enjoying themselves, and when jo collected her damaged property to go, her escort accompanied her, begging her to come again, “it was such fun to hear about laurie’s larks. come, peggy,” said jo, unfolding herself like an animated puzzle. beth began by rummaging everything out of the big closet where her family resided, but getting tired before half done, she left her establishment topsy-turvy and went to her music, rejoicing that she had no dishes to wash. scott’s suppers. she had never read sartor resartus, but she had a womanly instinct that clothes possess an influence more powerful over many than the worth of character or the magic of manners. ” mrs. jo let laurie win the game to pay for that praise of her beth, who could not be prevailed upon to play for them after her compliment. ” mrs. ” “i have so much to say, i don’t know where to begin! get in and we can talk at our ease. “it can’t seem so without marmee and little pip,” sighed beth, glancing with full eyes at the empty cage above her head. i wash my hands of you,” was amy’s short answer. from fire to oil was a natural transition for burned fingers, and amy fell to painting with undiminished ardor. then on the earth there would be indeed, a glorious washing day! along the path of a useful life, will heart’s-ease ever bloom. the long table was full, and every one intent on getting their dinner, the gentlemen especially, who seemed to be eating on time, for they bolted in every sense of the word, vanishing as soon as they were done. project gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected by u. who taught her?” “no one. “hurry and get done! don’t stop to quirk your little finger and simper over your plate, amy,” cried jo, choking on her tea and dropping her bread, butter side down, on the carpet in her haste to get at the treat. the fee is owed to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation. beth had a rapture with her mother, and then rushed up to impart the glorious news to her family of invalids, as the girls were not home. just then she was both, for it was perfectly evident from the knowing glances exchanged among the gentlemen that her little fiction of ‘my friend’ was considered a good joke, and a laugh, produced by some inaudible remark of the editor, as he closed the door, completed her discomfiture. well, dear, if i were you, i’d let john have more to do with the management of demi, for the boy needs training, and it’s none too soon to begin. i fancy the boy, who was born in italy, is not very strong, and the old man is afraid of losing him, which makes him so careful. amy found that housework and art did not go well together, and returned to her mud pies. things were in this state when the grand discovery was made, and jo watched laurie that night as she had never done before. ” “oh, yes, of course it’s very nice and proper in them to do so. sit down and listen, for indeed i want to do right and make you happy,” she said, hoping to soothe him with a little reason, which proved that she knew nothing about love. mother forbade it. i go about so much i must have things, you know, and sallie advised my getting it, so i did, and my new year’s money will partly pay for it, but i was sorry after i had done it, for i knew you’d think it wrong in me. then he flattered himself that he looked like a true briton, but the first time he had the mud cleaned off his shoes, the little bootblack knew that an american stood in them, and said, with a grin, “there yer har, sir. “here’s a sweet prospect!” muttered jo, slamming the stove door open, and poking vigorously among the cinders. the girls are all as good as gold. the handsome brute, just subdued, stood arching his neck under the tightly drawn rein, with one foot impatiently pawing the ground, and ears pricked up as if listening for the voice that had mastered him. “you’ve got me, anyhow. ” and jo looked a little queer likewise, for a name had almost escaped her. anything you say,” replies the shortsighted parent, preparing herself to sing, “the three little kittens” half a dozen times over, or to take her family to “buy a penny bun,” regardless of wind or limb. “sensible girls for whom i do care whole papers of pins won’t let me send them ‘flowers and things’, so what can i do? my feelings need a ‘vent’. “mother, are you angry when you fold your lips tight together and go out of the room sometimes, when aunt march scolds or people worry you?” asked jo, feeling nearer and dearer to her mother than ever before. ” next day amy was rather late at school, but could not resist the temptation of displaying, with pardonable pride, a moist brown-paper parcel, before she consigned it to the inmost recesses of her desk. he was always walking rapidly, and never seemed to see her until quite close, when he would look as if his short-sighted eyes had failed to recognize the approaching lady till that moment. the little back is too young to haf such heaviness. it seemed a small loss to others, but to jo it was a dreadful calamity, and she felt that it never could be made up to her. each do our part alone in many things, but at home we work together, always. i haven’t given up the hope that i may write a good book yet, but i can wait, and i’m sure it will be all the better for such experiences and illustrations as these,” and jo pointed from the lively lads in the distance to her father, leaning on the professor’s arm, as they walked to and fro in the sunshine, deep in one of the conversations which both enjoyed so much, and then to her mother, sitting enthroned among her daughters, with their children in her lap and at her feet, as if all found help and happiness in the face which never could grow old to them. never mind being bashful. earnest young men found the gray-headed scholar as young at heart as they; thoughtful or troubled women instinctively brought their doubts to him, sure of finding the gentlest sympathy, the wisest counsel. “do great boys like great girls, to, ’fessor?” like young washington, mr. john, dear, never stop to ask my leave, invite whom you please, and be sure of a welcome from me. i’ve tried to tell you, but i couldn’t. john would have preferred his own fireside if it had not been so lonely, but as it was he gratefully took the next best thing and enjoyed his neighbor’s society. please don’t!” “i will, and you must hear me. for amy’s face was full of the soft brightness which betokens a peaceful heart, her voice had a new tenderness in it, and the cool, prim carriage was changed to a gentle dignity, both womanly and winning. “well, you can leave it, if you like. bhaer gave me a fine shakespeare. father says i needn’t, it’s too soon and i’d rather not. “i thought you were going to tell your speech to that man,” said jo, rudely shortening her sister’s little reverie. ” jo paused a little over the last word, but laurie uttered it with a rapturous expression. ” if he hinted at a lecture or a concert, he was answered with a reproachful look, and a decided—“leave my children for pleasure, never!” his sleep was broken by infant wails and visions of a phantom figure pacing noiselessly to and fro in the watches of the night. “on the contrary, i like it very much, dear,” looking from the dusty rosary to the well-worn little book, and the lovely picture with its garland of evergreen. it may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. not a very splendid show, but there was a great deal of love done up in the few little bundles, and the tall vase of red roses, white chrysanthemums, and trailing vines, which stood in the middle, gave quite an elegant air to the table. mr. “sentimental? yes. “only one of my stupid speeches. i heard rumors about fred and you last year, and it’s my private opinion that if he had not been called home so suddenly and detained so long, something would have come of it, hey?” “that’s not for me to say,” was amy’s grim reply, but her lips would smile, and there was a traitorous sparkle of the eye which betrayed that she knew her power and enjoyed the knowledge. i do my best, meg. but when nothing remained of all her three month’s work except a heap of ashes and the money in her lap, jo looked sober, as she sat on the floor, wondering what she ought to do about her wages. march, holding out her hand, with a face which invited confidence. laurie says he is fast, and i don’t consider him a desirable acquaintance, so i let him alone. i know you will, it’s your way, and i shall have to stand by and see it,” and the despairing lover cast his hat upon the ground with a gesture that would have seemed comical, if his face had not been so tragic. it was dreadful, and the worst of it was john went on so quietly afterward, just as if nothing had happened, except that he stayed in town later, and worked at night when she had gone to cry herself to sleep. ” “and i implore you not to look at me during the ceremony. brooke owned that he liked meg but didn’t dare say so, she was so young and he so poor. i’d go myself, if i was any use. for a minute she felt as if she really couldn’t do it, then came the thought, “this is the beginning. “not at all. “money is a good and useful thing, jo, and i hope my girls will never feel the need of it too bitterly, nor be tempted by too much. little nap is a handsome boy, who sits chatting to his tutor, and kisses his hand to the people as he passes in his four-horse barouche, with postilions in red satin jackets and a mounted guard before and behind. goodbye, marmee. “i can’t say anything till he speaks, and he won’t, because father said i was too young,” began meg, bending over her work with a queer little smile, which suggested that she did not quite agree with her father on that point. haughty english, lively french, sober germans, handsome spaniards, ugly russians, meek jews, free-and-easy americans, all drive, sit, or saunter here, chatting over the news, and criticizing the latest celebrity who has arrived—ristori or dickens, victor emmanuel or the queen of the sandwich islands. “i’ll try, but it was a very ungentlemanly thing to do, i didn’t think you could be so sly and malicious, laurie,” replied meg, trying to hide her maidenly confusion under a gravely reproachful air. jo liked the prospect and was eager to be gone, for the home nest was growing too narrow for her restless nature and adventurous spirit. i’ll work hard and not trouble anyone, and you’ll take care of me, jo, so i’ll go. “not a true answer. i was very sorry for him, and disappointed for myself, but only for a minute because he said, as he shook hands, and said it in a way that i could not mistake, “i shall soon come back, you won’t forget me, amy?” i didn’t promise, but i looked at him, and he seemed satisfied, and there was no time for anything but messages and good-byes, for he was off in an hour, and we all miss him very much. “hush! let me handle this, for it is worse than i thought. unless you smile, your eyes look sad, and when i touched the cushion, just now, i found a tear on it. “don’t go to school, i’m a businessman—girl, i mean. on some accounts, this was a relief to his friends, but the weeks before his departure were very uncomfortable, and everyone rejoiced that the ‘poor, dear fellow was going away to forget his trouble, and come home happy’. then meg ordered home the greatcoat, and when john arrived, she put it on, and asked him how he liked her new silk gown. laurence!’” muttered old hannah, who could not resist frequent “peeks” through the slide as she set the table in a most decidedly promiscuous manner. when he offered her his arm, she took it with a look that filled him with delight, but when he asked if she missed him, she gave such a chilly, formal reply that despair fell upon him. the little thing has lost her heart to mr. jo wouldn’t love him, but he might make her respect and admire him by doing something which should prove that a girl’s ‘no’ had not spoiled his life. “oh, what will he say when he comes to that awful fifty dollars!” thought meg, with a shiver. “i don’t see how they can help it,” returned mr. for a minute jo stood still with a strange feeling in her heart, then she resolved to go on, but something held and turned her round, just in time to see amy throw up her hands and go down, with a sudden crash of rotten ice, the splash of water, and a cry that made jo’s heart stand still with fear. he did not speak to her again till suppertime, when he saw her drinking champagne with ned and his friend fisher, who were behaving ‘like a pair of fools’, as laurie said to himself, for he felt a brotherly sort of right to watch over the marches and fight their battles whenever a defender was needed. the instant laurie’s step was heard in the hall, meg fled into the study, and mrs. davis, with a monstrous nose and a hump, and the words, ‘young ladies, my eye is upon you!’ coming out of his mouth in a balloon thing. “you won’t show the soft side of your character, and if a fellow gets a peep at it by accident and can’t help showing that he likes it, you treat him as mrs. ” they laughed and chatted all the way home, and little baptiste, up behind, thought that monsieur and madamoiselle were in charming spirits. “we thought you had gone,” said jo hastily, for she knew he was looking at her. ” and i think jo was quite right. march became invisible in the embrace of four pairs of loving arms. he told her to ‘go along and cook it’, and she hurried off, so happy! wasn’t it good of him? oh, she did look so funny, hugging the big, slippery fish, and hoping mr. as they gathered about the table, mrs. i’m errand boy to this establishment,” said laurie, taking up his cap. “father, father, here’s the professor!” down went the black legs and up came the gray head, as the preceptor said, with undisturbed dignity, “good evening, mr. when she went home, he walked with her to her own gate, shook hands cordially, and touched his hat as he marched back again, looking very stately and erect, like a handsome, soldierly old gentleman, as he was. “i think we ought to tell her if beth is really ill, but hannah says we mustn’t, for mother can’t leave father, and it will only make them anxious. thank you, mother,” and jo gave the thin cheek a grateful kiss, more precious to mrs. march, crossing out the third spoiled sentence in her letter. ” “john is so sensible, i’m afraid he will think i’m stupid if i ask questions about politics and things. fortunately the child was moved to hug her, so she managed to hide her face an instant, hoping the professor did not see it. now you go into the parlor, and i’ll send ’em down to you,” with which somewhat involved reply hannah vanished, chuckling ecstatically. amy paris dear girls, in my last i told you about our london visit, how kind the vaughns were, and what pleasant parties they made for us. “that’s true. “goes on how, my dear?” asked her mother anxiously. “no. she excited the suspicions of public librarians by asking for works on poisons. i suppose it’s natural to some people to please without trying, and others to always say and do the wrong thing in the wrong place. ” “don’t believe i can. i can do it, for i have may chester as a model, and i’ll improve upon her. ” “there, beth, that’s an honor to be proud of, i’m sure! laurie told me how fond mr. ” “do you care for nuts?” “like a squirrel. if they love one another it doesn’t matter a particle how old they are nor how poor. i see it all! they’ll go lovering around the house, and we shall have to dodge. “i won’t trouble you. my head feels deliciously light and cool, and the barber said i could soon have a curly crop, which will be boyish, becoming, and easy to keep in order. shadowy effigies in armor stood on either side, a dead silence reigned, the lamp burned blue, and the ghostly figure ever and anon turned its face toward him, showing the glitter of awful eyes through its white veil. jo sat still, looking as if the fire had come to her, for her cheeks burned long after the cocked hat had turned to smoke and gone harmlessly up the chimney. there was a good deal to show, and by-and-by she saw, and was grateful for it. yonder he comes, arrayed like a bridegroom, except the black mask. laurence talked on about laurie’s lessons and teachers. it was not a fashionable place, but even among the pleasant people there, the girls made few friends, preferring to live for one another. “certainly not, though you do hear charming girls say that they intend to do it sometimes. “he’s too old. i didn’t feel blushy or quakey, but quite cool and only a little excited. “she is trying to like politics for my sake, so i’ll try and like millinery for hers, that’s only fair,” thought john the just, adding aloud, “that’s very pretty. the parlor windows were closed and curtained, no picture of the pretty wife sewing on the piazza, in white, with a distracting little bow in her hair, or a bright-eyed hostess, smiling a shy welcome as she greeted her guest. march can leave her husband she’d better be sent for. brooke, as she paused, quite ignoring her many mistakes, and looking as if he did indeed love to teach. she’s got most of the symptoms—is twittery and cross, doesn’t eat, lies awake, and mopes in corners. there were a great many holidays at plumfield, and one of the most delightful was the yearly apple-picking. bhaer sings that,” said jo, before the pause grew painful. meg was absent-minded, shy, and silent, started when the bell rang, and colored when john’s name was mentioned. “now do be reasonable, and take a sensible view of the case,” implored jo, almost at her wit’s end. the scientific celebrities, forgetting their mollusks and glacial periods, gossiped about art, while devoting themselves to oysters and ices with characteristic energy; the young musician, who was charming the city like a second orpheus, talked horses; and the specimen of the british nobility present happened to be the most ordinary man of the party. “do as he tells you. she put them on, the knights revived at once, thanked her, and went on their way rejoicing, never knowing the difference, for there were so many other heads like them in the world that no one thought anything of it. march did not say much but looked disturbed, and comforted her afflicted little daughter in her tenderest manner. she grieves about father, and looks sober except when she is at her little piano. the smallness of the company made it necessary for the two principal actors to take several parts apiece, and they certainly deserved some credit for the hard work they did in learning three or four different parts, whisking in and out of various costumes, and managing the stage besides. beyond sat a pair of humble lovers, artlessly holding each other by the hand, a somber spinster eating peppermints out of a paper bag, and an old gentleman taking his preparatory nap behind a yellow bandanna. ’ ‘all is sweet, pure, and healthy. ” meg said no more, but a few minutes after he found her in the hall with her face buried in the old greatcoat, crying as if her heart would break. “hang miss randal!” and laurie knocked the hat off his face with a look that left no doubt of his sentiments toward that young lady. it was not true, she knew that and tried to put it away, but the natural craving for affection was strong, and amy’s happiness woke the hungry longing for someone to ‘love with heart and soul, and cling to while god let them be together’. imagine her dismay, on stealing a glance of timid admiration at the poet whose lines suggested an ethereal being fed on ‘spirit, fire, and dew’, to behold him devouring his supper with an ardor which flushed his intellectual countenance. amy was a model of docility, and as her aunt was a good deal occupied with flo, she was left to entertain her friend, and did it with more than her usual success. “we go grubbing along day after day, without a bit of change, and very little fun. march smiled and was satisfied. it isn’t proper to be gadding about so late with a rattlepated boy like. she sent loving messages to amy, bade them tell her mother that she would write soon, and often begged for pencil and paper to try to say a word, that father might not think she had neglected him. “there, now i’ll take off the papers and you’ll see a cloud of little ringlets,” said jo, putting down the tongs. he had no thought of a melodramatic plunge, but some blind instinct led him to fling hat and coat into his boat, and row away with all his might, making better time up the river than he had done in any race. read him bits of my letters. your affectionate daughter. down the page went the green guide, and presently, forgetting her listener in the beauty of the sad scene, meg read as if alone, giving a little touch of tragedy to the words of the unhappy queen. her struggles were really pathetic. “here’s mine!” and amy waved her pencil. the little girls hailed amy and her treasures with delight, which cordial reception somewhat soothed her perturbed spirit, and she fell to work, determined to succeed florally, if she could not artistically. ” “what fun you’d have! i wish i could run off too,” said jo, forgetting her part of mentor in lively visions of martial life at the capital. “mercy me! i don’t know anything about love and such nonsense!” cried jo, with a funny mixture of interest and contempt. ” “i knows him!” and, after a few convulsive efforts, the red legs took the shape of a pair of compasses, and the intelligent pupil triumphantly shouted, “it’s a we, dranpa, it’s a we!” “he’s a born weller,” laughed jo, as her parent gathered himself up, and her nephew tried to stand on his head, as the only mode of expressing his satisfaction that school was over. men are very selfish, even the best of them. she shows me all her things, and i don’t think she’ll mind if i look at this”, thought beth, with a glance at her sister, who lay on the rug, with the tongs beside her, ready to wake up the minute the log fell apart. dashwood rejected any but thrilling tales, and as thrills could not be produced except by harrowing up the souls of the readers, history and romance, land and sea, science and art, police records and lunatic asylums, had to be ransacked for the purpose. she upset the tray of needles, forgot the silesia was to be ‘twilled’ till it was cut off, gave the wrong change, and covered herself with confusion by asking for lavender ribbon at the calico counter. “i took a last look at my hair while the man got his things, and that was the end of it. ” jo was sorry for that speech the minute it was made. so i let him have the two stories, and today this was sent to me, and laurie caught me with it and insisted on seeing it, so i let him. now, laurie. a few other topics of general interest were introduced by mr. now meg does not do anything of the sort. jo dropped a kiss on the top of mr. “if that’s the way he’s going to grow up, i wish he’d stay a boy,” she thought, with a curious sense of disappointment and discomfort, trying meantime to seem quite easy and gay. march knew that experience was an excellent teacher, and when it was possible she left her children to learn alone the lessons which she would gladly have made easier, if they had not objected to taking advice as much as they did salts and senna. the english played well, but the americans played better, and contested every inch of the ground as strongly as if the spirit of ’76 inspired them. gutenberg. ” “thank you. i shall go to aunt march, as usual. ” the patience and the humility of the face she loved so well was a better lesson to jo than the wisest lecture, the sharpest reproof. they had a merry time over the bonbons and mottoes, and were in the midst of a quiet game of _buzz_, with two or three other young people who had strayed in, when hannah appeared. i want you all to come, can’t let beth off at any price, and nobody shall worry her. we’ll leave a letter saying we are all right, and trot off at once. “i’d wring your neck if you were mine, you old torment,” cried laurie, shaking his fist at the bird, who put his head on one side and gravely croaked, “allyluyer! bless your buttons, dear!” “now i’m ready,” said amy, shutting the wardrobe and taking a piece of paper out of her pocket. “poor little thing! it was hard upon her when she tried so heartily to please me. the girls will help you about them, and i will pay for the making up,” replied mrs. “i fear i shall not make the time for that, but i wish the friend much success, and you all happiness. many very respectable people make an honest living out of what are called sensation stories,” said jo, scratching gathers so energetically that a row of little slits followed her pin. amy wants the rest of the page, so i must stop. i forbid him to do it, but he doesn’t mind me as he ought. she was soon back, and while noiselessly taking off her cloak, laurie came in with a letter, saying that mr. ” jo looked up then, quite unconscious of anything but her own pleasure in the prospect of showing them to one another. it was lined with books, and there were pictures and statues, and distracting little cabinets full of coins and curiosities, and sleepy hollow chairs, and queer tables, and bronzes, and best of all, a great open fireplace with quaint tiles all round it. “no more there is! will you have hash or fishballs for breakfast?” asked hannah, who wisely mingled poetry and prose. john was requested to order home a dozen or so of little pots and an extra quantity of sugar, for their own currants were ripe and were to be attended to at once. but she would have consented if he had proposed to sing a whole opera, and warbled away, blissfully regardless of time and tune. he hasn’t said anything, but he looks a great deal. i won’t be a common-place dauber, so i don’t intend to try any more. wouldst thou have said ‘yes’, then, if i had spoken?” “i don’t know. ” while amy dressed, she issued her orders, and jo obeyed them, not without entering her protest, however, for she sighed as she rustled into her new organdie, frowned darkly at herself as she tied her bonnet strings in an irreproachable bow, wrestled viciously with pins as she put on her collar, wrinkled up her features generally as she shook out the handkerchief, whose embroidery was as irritating to her nose as the present mission was to her feelings, and when she had squeezed her hands into tight gloves with three buttons and a tassel, as the last touch of elegance, she turned to amy with an imbecile expression of countenance, saying meekly. be quick, girls! it’s getting late. ” this artful allusion to benefits conferred brought tupman to his feet, looking as if he had quite made up his mind. it took his fancy immensely, and he put it on his mantlepiece as an article of virtue, so it was rather a failure after all. don’t you wish you could take a look forward and see where we shall all be then? i do,” returned laurie. it was not big nor red, like poor ‘petrea’s’, it was only rather flat, and all the pinching in the world could not give it an aristocratic point. “you think it would do with these alterations, then?” “yes, it’s a new plot, and pretty well worked up—language good, and so on,” was mr. chester’s fair was so very elegant and select that it was considered a great honor by the young ladies of the neighborhood to be invited to take a table, and everyone was much interested in the matter. suddenly some one passed below, whistling like an operatic blackbird, and a voice called out, “all serene! coming in tonight. we’re both as hungry as hunters, so we shan’t mind what it is. the old gentleman did not say much as he drank his four cups of tea, but he watched the young people, who soon chatted away like old friends, and the change in his grandson did not escape him. how they ever grew up alive in that whirlpool of boys was a mystery to their grandma and aunts, but they flourished like dandelions in spring, and their rough nurses loved and served them well. come home, dear, and i’ll find your bootjack. this vocal exercise usually conquered meg, but john sat as unmoved as the post which is popularly believed to be deaf. seeing sallie’s pretty things made her long for such, and pity herself because she had not got them. everybody’s health was proposed, from mr. jo behaved herself with exemplary propriety, and when amy was happily surrounded by her guard of honor, jo circulated about the hall, picking up various bits of gossip, which enlightened her upon the subject of the chester change of base. ” “he’s my child, and i can’t have his spirit broken by harshness. “i wish i’d been sensible and worn my own things, then i should not have disgusted other people, or felt so uncomfortable and ashamed of myself. if this expressive article of dress was drawn low upon the forehead, it was a sign that hard work was going on, in exciting moments it was pushed rakishly askew, and when despair seized the author it was plucked wholly off, and cast upon the floor. e. ” “anything you like, sir. but there was an unconscious emphasis on the last word, and a wistful look in the eyes that never lost their childlike candor, which chilled jo’s heart for a minute with a forboding fear, and decided her to make her little venture ‘soon’. “thank you, i will. “none at all, if you please, she doesn’t wish her name to appear and has no nom de plume,” said jo, blushing in spite of herself.