angkor wat is the best-preserved example of khmer architecture from the angkorian era along with hundreds of other temples that have been discovered in and around the region.. the attack against the president of the overseas press club of cambodia, rick valenzuela, was captured on video.. a map of indochina in 1760 the hill tribe people were "hunted incessantly and carried off as slaves by the siamese , the annamites , and the cambodians".. cambodia is the 70th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 global peace index.. textiles the garment industry represents the largest portion of cambodia's manufacturing sector, accounting for 80% of the country's exports.. administrative divisions main article: administrative divisions of cambodia the autonomous municipality and provinces of cambodia are first-level administrative divisions.. it spans an area of 181,035 square kilometres , and has a population of about 17 million.. the international rice research institute reintroduced more than 750 traditional rice varieties to cambodia from its rice seed bank in the philippines.. in august 2014, the tribunal sentenced khieu samphan, the regime's 83-year-old former head of state, and nuon chea, its 88-year-old chief ideologue, to life in prison on war crimes charges for their role in the country's terror period in the 1970s.. trains also run from phnom penh to sisophon .. cambodia is consistently listed as one of the most corrupt governments in the world.. the cpp currently commands 120 of the 125 seats in the national assembly and 55 of 62 seats in the senate.. the throne became vacant in 1941 with the death of monivong, sisowath's son, and france passed over monivong's son, monireth, feeling he was too independently minded.. a chinese company with the support of the people's liberation army built a deep-water seaport along 90 km stretch of cambodian coastline of the gulf of thailand in koh kong province; the port is sufficiently deep to be used by cruise ships, bulk carriers or warships.. in 2012, the exports grew to $4.61 billion up 8% over 2011. in the first half of 2013, the garment industry reported exports worth $1.56 billion.. biodiversity and conservation main article: wildlife of cambodia see also: list of protected areas of cambodia macaques at phnom pros, kampong cham province cambodia's biodiversity is largely founded on its seasonal tropical forests, containing some 180 recorded tree species, and riparian ecosystems.. examples include the circle dances romvong and romkbach as well as saravan and lam leav.. in december 2021, hun sen announced his support for his son hun manet to succeed him after the next general election in 2023. in october 2022, hun sen warned cpp members that the country's newest and largest opposition party, the candlelight party, may be dissolved before the 2023 general election.. the close interrelationship between spirits and the community, the efficacy of apotropaic and luck-attracting actions and charms, and the possibility of manipulating one's life through contact with spiritual entities such as the "baromey" spirits originates from the native folk religion.. the same message was conveyed to us president johnson's emissary chester bowles in january 1968. in public sihanouk refuted the right of the u.s. to use air strikes in cambodia, and on 26 march he said "these criminal attacks must immediately and definitively stop".. techo international airport, intended to replace the existing phnom penh international airport as the city's main airport, is currently under construction.. hun sen was succeeded by his son hun manet as prime minister in august 2023 following an election that was deemed by independent and foreign media and politicians to be neither free nor fair.. cambodia is highly vulnerable to the negative effects of climate change and it is advised that the country focuses more on developing renewable energy as part of climate change mitigation measures.. tra leaf books record legends of the khmer people, the ramayana, the origin of buddhism and other prayer books.. health main article: health in cambodia cambodian medical students watching a surgery operation cambodian life expectancy was 75 years in 2021, a major improvement since 1995 when the average life expectancy was 55. health care is offered by both public and private practitioners and research has found that trust in health providers is a key factor in improving the uptake of health care services in rural cambodia.. transport main article: transport in cambodia national highway 4 the civil war and neglect severely damaged cambodia's transport system.. this era gave rise to the term killing fields, and the prison tuol sleng became known for its history of mass killing.. members of the 123-seat national assembly are elected through a system of proportional representation and serve for a maximum term of five years.. the rainy season, which runs from may to october, can see temperatures drop to 22 °c and is generally accompanied with high humidity.. cambodian buddhism is deeply influenced by hinduism and native animism.. being isolated in the highlands, the various khmer loeu groups were not indianized like their khmer cousins and consequently are culturally distant from modern khmers and often from each other, observing many pre-indian-contact customs and beliefs.. cambodian popular music is performed with western style instruments or a mixture of traditional and western instruments.. the two networks were separated by time and space, which indicate that there was a shift from one network to the other at about the 2nd–4th century ad, probably due to changes in socio-political powers.. they and their followers instituted the cult of the god-king and began a series of conquests that formed an empire which flourished in the area from the 9th to the 15th centuries.. the regime disproportionately targeted ethnic minority groups.. upstream dams will imperil the fish stocks that provide the vast majority of cambodia's protein and could also denude the mekong river of the silt vietnam needs for its rice basket.". the people's republic of kampuchea was established as a pro-soviet state led by the kampuchean people's revolutionary party, a party created by the vietnamese in 1951, and led by a group of khmer rouge who had fled cambodia to avoid being purged by pol pot and ta mok.. following the 2024 senate election, hun sen became president of the senate, a role which gives him the power to sign off on laws in the king's absence.. pre-angkorian, angkorian, and post-angkor main articles: kingdom of funan, chenla, khmer empire, and post-angkor period angkor wat faces of bodhisattva avalokiteshvara at prasat bayon during the 3rd, 4th, and 5th centuries, the indianised states of funan and its successor, chenla, coalesced in what later is cambodia and southwestern vietnam.. cambodia, officially the kingdom of cambodia, is a country in southeast asia on the indochinese peninsula.. in 2012, credit bureau cambodia was established with direct regulatory oversight by the national bank of cambodia.. rabbit island koh tonsay in cambodia.. senators serve six-year terms.. in december 1967 washington post journalist stanley karnow was told by sihanouk that if the us wanted to bomb the vietnamese communist sanctuaries, he would not object unless cambodians were killed.. tourism has increased steadily each year in the relatively stable period since the 1993 untac elections.. in 2017, cambodia's supreme court dissolved the main opposition party, cambodia national rescue party , paving the way for a return to a yet more authoritarian political system.. in the 1980s it was an important primary commodity, second only to rice, and one of the country's few sources of foreign exchange.. from a humble farming background, hun sen was just 33 when he took power in 1985, and was by some considered a long-ruling dictator.. cambodia's infant mortality rate has decreased from 86 per 1,000 live births in 1998 to 24 in 2018. in the province with worst health indicators, ratanakiri, 22.9% of children die before age five.. much of this area has been designated as a biosphere reserve.. music main article: music of cambodia sinn sisamouth, a famous cambodian singer traditional cambodian music dates back as far as the khmer empire.. please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.. the worldwide fund for nature recognises six distinct terrestrial ecoregions in cambodia – the cardamom mountains rain forests, central indochina dry forest, southeast indochina dry evergreen forest, southern annamite range tropical forest, tonle sap freshwater swamp forest, and tonle sap-mekong peat swamp forest.. instead, norodom sihanouk, a maternal grandson of king sisowath was enthroned.. cambodian red curry is also eaten with rice and rice vermicelli noodles.. on 22 august 2023, hun manet was sworn in as the new cambodian prime minister.. when prepared with macerated fruits or spices, like the sombai liqueur, it is called sra tram .. this marked the beginning of the khmer empire.. the rich fisheries of tonle sap, the largest freshwater lake in southeast asia, largely supply the impoverished country's protein.. sihanouk allowed the vietnamese communists to use cambodia as a sanctuary and a supply route for their arms and other aid to their armed forces fighting in south vietnam.. ranariddh was ousted and fled to paris while other opponents of hun sen were arrested, tortured, and some summarily executed.. in 2018, they handled a record of 10 million passengers.. farmers harvesting rice in battambang province cambodia ranked among the worst places in the world for organised labour in the 2015 international trade union confederation global rights index, landing in the category of countries with "no guarantee of rights".'. cambodia has two rail lines, totalling about 612 kilometres of single, one-metre gauge track.. the khmer empire was southeast asia's largest empire during the 12th century.. after its government was able to stabilize under sen, cambodia was accepted into the association of southeast asian nations on 30 april 1999. norodom sihamoni was crowned cambodia's king in 2004 after his father sihanouk's abdication.. the un was given a mandate to enforce a ceasefire and deal with refugees and disarmament known as the united nations transitional authority in cambodia .. cambodia had issued over 150 such licenses before the new policy was announced.. in a series of 1993 interviews of women about prostitution, three quarters of the interviewees found being a prostitute to be a norm and a profession they felt was not shameful having.. lawyers did not reappear until 1995 when the bar association of the kingdom of cambodia was created.. known formally as robam preah reach troap it is set to the music of a pinpeat ensemble accompanied by a vocal chorus.. a new national environmental strategy and action plan for cambodia is to be implemented from late 2016 to 2023 and contains new ideas for how to incite a green and environmentally sustainable growth for the country.. the royal gendarmerie of cambodia total more than 7,000 personnel.. when it is dark enough, the tea is decanted into another cup and plenty of sugar added, but no milk.. in the july 2023 election, the ruling cambodian people's party easily won by a landslide in a flawed election, after the disqualification of cambodia's most important opposition, candlelight party.. the english cambodia is an anglicisation of the french cambodge, which in turn is the french transliteration of the khmer កម្ពុជា .. in cambodia, landmines and exploded ordnance alone have caused 44,630 injuries between 1979 and 2013, according to the cambodia mine/uxo victim information system.. cambodia's economy grew rapidly in the 2000s and 2010s, and it received considerable investment and infrastructure development support from china as part of its belt and road initiative.. there are disagreements over some offshore islands and sections of the boundary with vietnam and undefined maritime boundaries.. the provinces are subdivided into 159 districts and 26 municipalities.. kampot pepper is reputed to be the best in the world and accompanies crab at the kep crab shacks and squid in the restaurants on the ou trojak jet river.. for more than 2,000 years, what was to become cambodia absorbed influences from india, passing them on to other southeast asian civilisations that later became thailand and laos.. traditionally, the khmer people have a recorded information on tra leaves.. the senate has 61 seats, two of which are appointed by the king and two others by the national assembly, and the rest elected by the commune councillors from the 24 provinces of cambodia.. iron was worked by about 500 bc, with supporting evidence coming from the khorat plateau, in what later is thailand.. the north vietnamese and viet cong forces, desperate to retain their sanctuaries and supply lines from north vietnam, launched armed attacks on the new government.. khmer traditional social dances are analogous to those of other southeast asian nations.. the australian hip hop group astronomy class has recorded with kak channthy, a native-born cambodian female singer.. during the khmer rouge revolution, many classic and popular singers of the 1960s and 1970s were murdered, starved to death, or overwork to death by the khmer rouge.. prehistoric evidence are the "circular earthworks" discovered in the red soils near memot and in the adjacent region of vietnam in the latter 1950s.. in cambodia, some iron age settlements were found beneath baksei chamkrong and other angkorian temples while circular earthworks were discovered at the site of lovea kilometres north-west of angkor.. the credit bureau further increases the transparency and stability within the cambodian banking sector as all banks and microfinance companies are now required by law to report accurate facts and figures relating to loan performance in the country.. kinds of glass beads recovered from sites, such as the phum snay site in the northwest and the prohear site in the southeast, suggest that there were two main trading networks at the time.. science and technology main article: science and technology in cambodia a national committee for science and technology representing 11 ministries has been in place since 1999. although seven ministries are responsible for the country's 33 public universities, the majority of these institutions come under the umbrella of the ministry of education, youth and sports.. the largest ethnic group, the khmers are indigenous to the lowland mekong subregion in which they inhabit.. among the cambodian population aged over 65, the female to male ratio is 1.6:1. the total fertility rate in cambodia was 2.5 children per woman in 2018. the fertility rate was 4.0 children in 2000. women in urban areas have 2.2 children on average, compared with 3.3 children per woman in rural areas.. tourism receipts exceeded us$4.4 billion in 2018, accounting for almost ten per cent of the kingdom's gross national product.. cambodia's primary forest cover fell from over 70% in 1969 to just 3.1% in 2007. since 2007, less than 3,220 km2 of primary forest remain with the result that the future sustainability of the forest reserves of cambodia is under severe threat.. the dengue fever rock and roll band features a cambodian female singer and back-up band from california.. the stability established following the conflict was shaken in 1997 by a coup d'état led by the co-prime minister hun sen, who ousted ranariddh and other parties represented in the government and consolidated power for cpp.. phnom penh airport shuttle train cambodia's road traffic accident rate is high by world standards.. the country experiences the heaviest precipitation from september to october with the driest period occurring from january to february.. in response to the north vietnamese invasion, us president richard nixon announced that us and south vietnamese ground forces had entered cambodia in a campaign aimed at destroying nva base areas in cambodia .. since 1993, there has been a growing use of english, which has been replacing french as the main foreign language.. its quality varies widely and it is often infused with fruits or medicinal herbs.. on 28 march a press conference was held and sihanouk appealed to the international media: "i appeal to you to publicise abroad this very clear stand of cambodia—that is, i will, in any case, oppose all bombings on cambodian territory under whatever pretext.". some critics of the government have been arrested for allegedly spreading fake news about the covid-19 pandemic in cambodia.. in opposition to the newly created state, a government-in-exile referred to as the coalition government of democratic kampuchea was formed in 1981 from 3 factions.. ethnic groups further information: ethnic groups in cambodia an ethnic map of cambodia the vast majority of cambodia's population is of ethnic khmer origin who are speakers of the khmer language, the country's sole official language.. beans are traditionally roasted with butter and sugar, plus various other ingredients that might include anything from rum to pork fat, giving the beverage a strange, sometimes faintly chocolatey aroma.. islam is followed by about 2% of the population and comes in three varieties, two practised by the cham people and a third by the descendants of malays, resident in the country for generations.. on new year's day 1975, communist troops launched an offensive which, in 117 days, led to the collapse of the khmer republic.. the khmers historically have lived near the lower mekong river in a contiguous diagonal arc, from where modern-day thailand, laos, and cambodia meet in the northwest, all the way to the mouth of the mekong river in southeastern vietnam.. cambodia has established diplomatic relations with numerous countries; the government reports twenty embassies in the country including many of its asian neighbours and those of important players during the paris peace negotiations, including the us, australia, canada, china, the european union , japan, and russia.. demonstrators were injured and killed in phnom penh where a reported 20,000 protesters gathered, with some clashing with riot police.. anti-government protests supporting opposition party cnrp followed the 2013 general election.. 1962 5,728,771 — 1980 6,600,000 +0.79% 1994 9,900,000 +2.94% 1996 10,700,000 +3.96% 1998 11,437,656 +3.39% 2004 12,800,000 +1.89% 2008 13,395,682 +1.14% 2013 14,700,000 +1.88% 2019 15,552,211 +0.94% national institute of statistics: general population census of the kingdom of cambodia 2019, chapter 2, p. 6 the french protectorate of cambodia condudcted its first official census in 1921. only men aged 20 to 60 were counted, as its purpose was for the collection of taxes.. most chinese are descended from 19th–20th-century settlers who came in search of trade and commerce opportunities during the time of the french protectorate.. the lines run from the capital to sihanoukville on the southern coast.. while constitutionally a multi-party state, cpp dominates the political system and dissolved its main opposition party in 2017, making it a de facto one-party state.. held at the end of the rainy season when the mekong river begins to sink back to its normal levels allowing the tonle sap river to reverse flow, approximately 10% of cambodia's population attends this event each year to play games, give thanks to the moon, watch fireworks, dine, and attend the boat race in a carnival-type atmosphere.. rank name province pop.. amnesty international currently recognises one prisoner of conscience in the country: 33-year-old land rights activist yorm bopha.. the cambodia national rescue party was dissolved ahead of the 2018 cambodian general election and the ruling cambodian people's party also enacted tighter curbs on mass media.. the 1980s and 1990s also saw the rise in popularity of kantrum, a music style of the khmer surin set to modern instrumentation.. cambodia is a member of the united nations, asean, the rcep, the east asia summit, the wto, the non-aligned movement and la francophonie, and a dialogue partner of the shanghai cooperation organisation.. the name cambodia is used most often in the western world while kampuchea is more widely used in the eastern world.. on 18 may 2018, the project advisory committee of the ilo better factories cambodia programme met in phnom penh to provide input into the draft conclusions and recommendations of the bfc's independent mid-term evaluation, as well as to discuss options on how to further strengthen the programme's transparent reporting initiative.. cambodia is expected to be free of land mines by 2025 but the social and economic legacy, including orphans and one in 290 people being an amputee, is expected to affect cambodia for years to come.. prime minister hun sen assumed office 39 years ago and is one of the world's longest-serving leaders.. the un now designates it a least developed country.. mahayana buddhism is the religion of the majority of chinese and vietnamese in cambodia.. for the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.. besides the main inter-provincial traffic artery connecting phnom penh with sihanoukville, resurfacing a former dirt road with concrete/asphalt and bridging five major river crossings have now permanently connected phnom penh with koh kong, and hence there is now uninterrupted road access to neighbouring thailand and its road network.. a us-funded airlift of ammunition and rice ended when congress refused additional aid for cambodia.. a 1970 coup installed the us-aligned khmer republic, which was overthrown by the khmer rouge in 1975. the khmer rouge ruled the country and carried out the cambodian genocide from 1975 until 1979, when they were ousted in the cambodian–vietnamese war.. the cuisine is relatively unknown to the world compared to that of its neighbours thailand and vietnam.. to attract more investment in renewable energy, the government could improve renewable energy governance, adopt clear targets, develop an effective regulatory framework, improve project bankability and facilitate market entry for international investors.. after 14 years, regular rail services between the two cities restarted recently – offering a safer option than road for travellers.. the french thought young sihanouk would be easy to control.. bribes are often demanded from companies operating in cambodia when obtaining licences and permits, such as construction-related permits.. forced repatriation in 1970 and deaths during the khmer rouge era reduced the vietnamese population in cambodia from between 250,000 and 300,000 in 1969 to a reported 56,000 in 1984. most of the victims of the khmer rouge regime were not ethnic minorities but ethnic khmer.. that same year, it was estimated that there were about 100,000 sex workers in cambodia.. almost all cham in cambodia are muslims.. the cpp won every seat in the national assembly without major opposition, effectively solidifying de facto one-party rule in the country.. phnom penh international airport is the busiest airport in cambodia.. elements of other religious practices, such as the veneration of folk heroes and ancestors, confucianism, and taoism mix with chinese buddhism are also practised.. examples of areas where cambodians encounter corrupt practices in their everyday lives include obtaining medical services, dealing with alleged traffic violations, and pursuing fair court verdicts.. the empire's centre of power was angkor, where a series of capitals were constructed during the empire's zenith.. cambodia's government has been described by human rights watch's southeast asian director, david roberts, as a "relatively authoritarian coalition via a superficial democracy".. major secondary crops include maize, cassava, sweet potatoes, groundnuts, soybeans, sesame seeds, dry beans, and rubber.. tourism employs 26% of the country's workforce, which translates into roughly 2.5 million jobs for cambodians.. companies deal with extensive red tape when obtaining licenses and permits, especially construction-related permits, and the demand for and supply of bribes are commonplace in this process.. waterfall at phnom kulen prey lang forest the rate of deforestation in cambodia is one of the highest in the world and it is often perceived as the most destructive, singular environmental issue in the country.. phnom penh phnom penh siem reap siem reap 1 phnom penh – 2,281,951 11 chbar mon kampong speu 50,359 battambang battambang sisophon sisophon 2 siem reap siem reap 245,494 12 bavet svay rieng 43,783 3 battambang battambang 119,251 13 doun kaev takéo 43,402 4 sisophon banteay meanchey 99,019 14 svay rieng svay rieng 41,424 5 poipet banteay meanchey 98,934 15 kampong chhnang kampong chhnang 41,080 6 ta khmau kandal 75,629 16 kampong cham kampong cham 38,365 7 sihanoukville preah sihanouk 73,036 17 pailin pailin 37,393 8 samraong oddar meanchey 70,944 18 prey veng prey veng 36,254 9 pursat pursat 58,355 19 suong tboung khmum 35,054 10 stueng saen kampong thom 53,118 20 kampot kampot 32,053 languages see also: demographics of cambodia § languages the khmer language is a member of the mon–khmer subfamily of the austroasiatic language group.. cambodia's landscape is characterised by a low-lying central plain that is surrounded by uplands and low mountains and includes the tonle sap and the upper reaches of the mekong river delta.. favouritism by government officials and impunity is commonplace.. in april 2016 cambodia's national assembly has adopted a law on trade unions.. it has a 443-kilometre coastline along the gulf of thailand.. the music of crooner sinn sisamouth, ros sereysothea, and pen ran from the 1960s to the 1970s is considered to be the classic pop music of cambodia.. due to this shift, mostly english is now used in cambodia's international relationships, and it has replaced french both on cambodia's stamps and, since 2002, on cambodian currency.. plans for hydroelectric development in the greater mekong subregion, by laos in particular, pose a "real danger to the food supply of vietnam and cambodia.. the environmental degradation also includes national parks and wildlife sanctuaries on a large scale and many endangered and endemic species are now threatened with extinction due to loss of habitats.. agriculture accounted for 90 per cent of gdp in 1985 and employed approximately 80 per cent of the workforce.. climate change has also had a major impact on water levels, ecology and productivity of the tonlé sap in recent years, affecting the food security and agriculture of a large proportion of cambodia's population.. the tonle sap biosphere reserve is a reserve surrounding the tonle sap lake.. traditionally, education in cambodia was offered by the wats , thus providing education exclusively for the male population.. the area around kampot and kep including the bokor hill station are also of interest to visitors.. other prehistoric sites of somewhat uncertain date are samrong sen , where the first investigations began in 1875, and phum snay, in the northern province of banteay meanchey.. rice is the principal commodity.. prime minister hun manet with japanese prime minister fumio kishida, 18 december 2023 while the violent ruptures of the 1970s and 1980s have passed, several border disputes between cambodia and its neighbours persist.. legislative powers are shared by the executive and the bicameral parliament of cambodia , which consists of a lower house, the national assembly and an upper house, the senate .. there are 212 mammal species, 536 bird species, 240 reptile species, 850 freshwater fish species , and 435 marine fish species recorded by science.. social dances are those performed by guests at banquets, parties or other informal social gatherings.. this move represented the first step towards a national approach to research and development across the university sector and the application of research for the purposes of national development.. regarding coffee, the beans are generally imported from laos and vietnam – although domestically produced coffee from ratanakiri province and mondulkiri province can be found in some places.. these varieties had been collected in the 1960s.. the movements are less stylised and the clothing worn is that of the people the dancers are portraying, such as hill tribes, chams or farmers.. the constitution of cambodia promulgates free compulsory education for nine years, guaranteeing the universal right to basic quality education.. in 1997, fearing the growing power of his co-prime minister, prince norodom ranariddh, hun launched a coup, using the army to purge ranariddh and his supporters.. his majesty king norodom sihamoni is the supreme commander of the royal cambodian armed forces , and the country's prime minister hun sen effectively holds the position of commander-in-chief.. archaeological records for the period between the holocene and iron age remain equally limited.. there are also a growing number of microbreweries in phnom penh and siem reap.. it borders thailand to the north and west, laos to the northeast, and vietnam to the east and southeast.. the cham are descended from the austronesian people of champa, a former kingdom on the coast of central and southern present-day vietnam and former rival to the khmer empire.. tens of thousands of people were killed during the us bombing of cambodia between 1970 and 1973. operation eagle pull khmer rouge rebels began using him to gain support.. rural coastal populations are particularly at risk.. typically faster-paced than classical dance, folk dances display themes of the "common person" such as love, comedy or warding off evil spirits.. as they gained control of cambodian territory, the vietnamese communists imposed a new political infrastructure, which was eventually dominated by the cambodian communists now referred to as the khmer rouge.. crime further information: crime in cambodia in 2017, cambodia had a homicide rate of 2.4 per 100,000 population.. the khmer rouge representative to un, thiounn prasith, was retained, and he had to work in consultation with representatives of the noncommunist cambodian parties.. the mekong and the tonle sap river, their numerous tributaries, and the tonle sap provided avenues of considerable length, including 3,700 kilometres navigable all year by craft drawing 0.6 metres and another 282 kilometres navigable to craft drawing 1.8 metres .. two of cambodia's most acclaimed universities are based in phnom penh.. the dances are performed by intricately costumed, highly trained men and women on public occasions for tribute, invocation or to enact traditional stories and epic poems such as reamker, the khmer version of the ramayana.. hinduism has left little trace beyond the magical practices of tantricism and a host of hindu gods now assimilated into the spirit world .. as the vietnam war progressed, sihanouk adopted an official policy of neutrality in the cold war.. coedes suggests that the kambu swayambhuva legend has its origins in southern india, as a version of the kanchi pallava dynasty creation myth.. agriculture remains the dominant economic sector, with growth in textiles, construction, garments, and tourism leading to increased foreign investment and international trade.. flowing south through cambodia's eastern regions is the mekong river.. the exact origins of khmer classical dance are disputed.. of the naturally regenerating forest 4% was reported to be primary forest .. soccer was brought to cambodia by the french and became popular with the locals.. prostitution is illegal in cambodia but yet appears to be prevalent.. other key habitats include the evergreen and dry dipterocarp forests of mondolkiri province, protected by keo seima wildlife sanctuary, phnom prich wildlife sanctuary, and srepok wildlife sanctuary, as well as ratanakiri province, and the cardamom mountains ecosystem, including preah monivong national park, botum-sakor national park, and the phnom aural wildlife sanctuary and phnom samkos wildlife sanctuary.. in 1997, it was successfully nominated as a unesco biosphere reserve.. chinese cambodians are approximately 0.6% of the population.. professionals, such as doctors, lawyers and teachers, were targeted.. rice wine is a popular alcoholic drink.. around the 13th century, theravada missionaries from sri lanka reintroduced theravada buddhism to southeast asia, having sent missionaries previously in the 1190s.. the protests ended after a crackdown by government forces.. with assistance from other countries, cambodia has been upgrading the main highways to international standards and most are vastly improved from 2006. most main roads are now paved.. cambodia has two major ports, phnom penh and sihanoukville, and five minor ones.. extending outward from this central region are transitional plains, thinly forested and rising to elevations of about 650 feet above sea level.. cambodia has two distinct seasons.. main article: tourism in cambodia every year, nearly 2.6 million tourists visit angkor wat in siem reap, cambodia.. during the 15-day festival, people offer prayers and food to the spirits of their dead relatives.. as a result of its international relations, various charitable organisations have assisted with social, economic, and civil infrastructure needs.. in 2010, the ministry of education, youth and sports approved a policy on research development in the education sector.. the institute of foreign languages of the royal university of phnom penh the 2019 cambodian census estimated that 88.5% of the population was literate .. he was enthroned in phnom penh on 29 october 2004. officially a multiparty democracy, in reality, "the country remain a one-party state dominated by the cambodian people's party and prime minister hun sen, a recast khmer rouge official in power since 1985. the open doors to new investment during his reign have yielded the most access to a coterie of cronies of his and his wife, bun rany", according to megha bahree, a writer on forbes.. judges and lawyers were executed after being deemed "class enemies" and only 6–12 legal professionals actually survived and remained in the country.. most are urban dwellers, engaged primarily in commerce.. tourism this section needs to be updated.. based on the economist, imf: annual average gdp growth for the period 2001–2010 was 7.7% making it one of the world's top ten countries with the highest annual average gdp growth.. in 2004, the number of road fatalities per 10,000 vehicles was ten times higher in cambodia than in the developed world, and the number of road deaths had doubled in the preceding three years.. cambodia has three commercial airports.. the sampeah is a traditional cambodian greeting or a way of showing respect to others.. it is among the most vulnerable countries to climate change.. the secretaries of state for defense are chay saing yun and por bun sreu.. cambodia's reputation as a safe destination for tourism has been hindered by civil and political unrest and several high-profile examples of serious crime committed against tourists visiting the kingdom.. colloquially, cambodians refer to their country as either srok khmer , or the slightly more formal ប្រទេសកម្ពុជា .. dance music is composed in particular styles for social dances.. shortages of clean water, extreme flooding, mudslides, higher sea levels and potentially destructive storms are of particular concern, according to the cambodia climate change alliance.. the lake is unusual: it all but disappears in the dry season and then expands massively as water flow from the mekong backs up when the rains come.. its capital and most populous city is phnom penh.. much of this biodiversity is contained around the tonle sap lake and the surrounding biosphere.. he has been accused of crackdowns on opponents and critics.. reasons for the deforestation in cambodia range from opportunistic illegal loggings to large scale clearings from big construction projects and agricultural activities.. international visitor arrivals in 2018 topped six million, a ten-fold increase since the beginning of the 21st century.. it encompasses the lake and nine provinces: kampong thom, siem reap, battambang, pursat, kampong chhnang, banteay meanchey, pailin, oddar meanchey and preah vihear.. vietnamese occupation and transition main articles: people's republic of kampuchea and cambodian–vietnamese war in november 1978, vietnamese troops invaded cambodia in response to border raids by the khmer rouge and conquered it.. the southern coastal region adjoining the gulf of thailand is a narrow lowland strip, heavily wooded and sparsely populated, which is isolated from the central plain by the southwestern highlands.. history main article: history of cambodia prehistory main article: early history of cambodia glazed stoneware dating back to the 12th century there exists evidence for a pleistocene human occupation of what later is cambodia, which includes quartz and quartzite pebble tools found in terraces along the mekong river, in stung treng and kratié provinces, and in kampot province.. documents uncovered from the soviet archives after 1991 reveal that the north vietnamese attempt to overrun cambodia in 1970 was launched at the explicit request of the khmer rouge and negotiated by pol pot's then second in command, nuon chea.. the cuisine of cambodia contains tropical fruits, soups and noodles.. to the north the cambodian plain abuts a sandstone escarpment, which forms a southward-facing cliff stretching more than 200 miles from west to east and rising abruptly above the plain to heights of 600 to 1,800 feet .. human rights main article: human rights in cambodia cambodia's deputy opposition leader kem sokha has been arrested in september 2017, while opposition leader sam rainsy has lived in exile since november 2015. a us state department report says "forces under hun sen and the cambodian people's party have committed frequent and large-scale abuses, including extrajudicial killings and torture, with impunity".. the former is popular among the older generation and is most often a solo performance of a man plucking a cambodian guitar in between a cappella verses.. according to the international development research center and the united nations, cambodia is considered southeast asia's most vulnerable country to the effects of climate change, alongside the philippines.. male youth age have a literacy rate of 89% compared to 86% for females.. rural cambodians wear a krama scarf which is a unique aspect of cambodian clothing.. upper layers in the same site gave evidence of transition to neolithic, containing the earliest dated earthenware ceramics in cambodia.. journalists covering a protest over disputed election results in phnom penh on 22 september 2013 say they were deliberately attacked by police and men in plain clothes, with slingshots and stun guns.. the sector employs 335,400 workers, of which 91% are female.. sihanouk international airport, is in the coastal city of sihanoukville.. phnom penh, at the junction of the bassac, the mekong, and the tonle sap rivers, is the only river port capable of receiving 8,000-ton ships during the wet season and 5,000-ton ships during the dry season.. cambodia first participated in the olympics during the 1956 summer olympic games sending equestrian riders.. despite adopting an 'anti-corruption law' in 2010, corruption prevails throughout the country.. simultaneous attacks around the perimeter of phnom penh pinned down republican forces, while other cpk units overran fire bases controlling the vital lower mekong resupply route.. its arms came from vietnam and the soviet union.. the education system in cambodia continues to face many challenges, but during the past years, there have been significant improvements, especially in terms of primary net enrolment gains, the introduction of program based-budgeting, and the development of a policy framework which helps disadvantaged children to gain access to education.. food stands in siem reap oil and natural gas deposits found beneath cambodia's territorial waters in 2005 yield great potential but remain mostly untapped, due in part to territorial disputes with thailand.. on 14 october 2004, king norodom sihamoni was selected by a special nine-member royal throne council, part of a selection process that was quickly put in place after the abdication of king norodom sihanouk a week prior.. credible non-governmental organisations estimate that "770,000 people have been adversely affected by land grabbing covering at least four million hectares of land that have been confiscated", says paris-based international federation for human rights .. native sports include traditional boat racing, buffalo racing, pradal serey, khmer traditional wrestling and bokator.. legal profession the cambodian legal profession was established in 1932. by 1978, due to the khmer rouge regime, the entire legal system was eradicated.. the directive cited the fact that "some foreigners have used this form of gambling to cheat victims inside and outside the country" as justifying the new policy.. formerly part of the khmer empire, the mekong delta had been controlled by the vietnamese since 1698, with king chey chettha ii granting the vietnamese permission to settle in the area decades before.. number province capital area population 1 banteay meanchey serei saophoan 6,679 861,883 2 battambang battambang 11,702 997,169 3 kampong cham kampong cham 4,549 899,791 4 kampong chhnang kampong chhnang 5,521 527,027 5 kampong speu chbar mon 7,017 877,523 6 kampong thom stung saen 13,814 681,549 7 kampot kampot 4,873 593,829 8 kandal ta khmau 3,179 1,201,581 9 kep kep 336 42,665 10 koh kong khemarak phoumin 10,090 125,902 11 kratié kratié 11,094 374,755 12 mondulkiri senmonorom 14,288 92,213 13 oddar meanchey samraong 6,158 276,038 14 pailin pailin 803 75,112 15 phnom penh phnom penh 679 2,281,951 16 preah sihanouk preah sihanouk 1,938 310,072 17 preah vihear preah vihear 13,788 254,827 18 pursat pursat 12,692 419,952 19 prey veng prey veng 4,883 1,057,720 20 ratanakiri banlung 10,782 217,453 21 siem reap siem reap 10,299 1,014,234 22 stung treng stung treng 11,092 165,713 23 svay rieng svay rieng 2,966 525,497 24 takéo doun kaev 3,563 900,914 25 tboung khmom suong 5,250 776,841 economy main article: economy of cambodia real gpd per capita development of cambodia in 2017 cambodia's per capita income is $4,022 in ppp and $1,309 in nominal per capita.. fear of renewed political instability and corruption within the government discourage foreign investment and delay foreign aid, although there has been significant aid from bilateral and multilateral donors.. it borders thailand to the northwest, laos to the north, vietnam to the east, and has a coastline along the gulf of thailand in the southwest.. prime minister hun sen vowed to rule until he turned 74. his government was regularly accused of ignoring human rights and suppressing political dissent.. religious institutions were targeted by the khmer rouge.. once the coup was completed, the new regime, which demanded that the vietnamese communists leave cambodia, gained the political support of the united states.. in 2010, the royal cambodian armed forces comprised about 102,000 active personnel .. some archaeological evidence shows communities of hunter-gatherers inhabited the region during the holocene: the most ancient archaeological discovery site in cambodia is considered to be the cave of laang spean, which belongs to the hoabinhian period.. the khmer empire grew out of the remnants of chenla, becoming firmly established in 802 when jayavarman ii declared independence from java and proclaimed themselves a devaraja.. as of 2019, there are 12 brewpubs or microbreweries in cambodia.. folk dances originated in the villages and are performed, for the most part, by the villagers for the villagers.. adults that survive landmines often require amputation of one or more limbs and have to resort to begging for survival.. the un withdrew after the 1993 cambodian general election, decided by around 90% of registered voters.. the violence came amid political tensions as the opposition boycotted the opening of parliament due to concerns about electoral fraud.. it is classified as "world music" and combines cambodian music with western-style rock.. the prime minister is appointed by the king, on the advice and with the approval of the national assembly.. a july 2023 human rights watch report showed numerous and significant election fraud and vote tampering in the june 2022 commune elections.. french, once the language of government in indochina, is still spoken by many older cambodians, and is also the language of instruction in some schools and universities that are funded by the government of france.. because cambodia is a member of asean, and because under asean rules "the objections of one member can thwart any group initiative", cambodia is diplomatically useful to china as a counterweight to southeast asian nations that have closer ties to the united states.. the lon nol government in phnom penh surrendered on 17 april 1975, 5 days after the us mission evacuated cambodia.. in southwestern cambodia two distinct upland blocks, the krâvanh mountains and the dâmrei mountains, form another highland region that covers much of the land area between the tonle sap and the gulf of thailand.. in cambodia forest cover is around 46% of the total land area, equivalent to 8,068,370 hectares of forest in 2020, down from 11,004,790 hectares in 1990. in 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 7,464,400 hectares and planted forest covered 603,970 hectares .. rice, fish, timber, garments, and rubber are cambodia's major exports.. the vietnamese are the second-largest ethnic minority in cambodia, with an estimated 16,000 living in provinces concentrated in the southeast of the country adjacent to the mekong delta.. most native khmer scholars trace modern dance forms back to the time of angkor, seeing similarities in the temple engravings of the period, while others hold that modern khmer dance styles were learned from siamese court dancers in the 1800s.. this policy was followed by the country's first national science and technology master plan 2014–2020.. cambodia's muslim population is reported to be 80% ethnic cham.. cambodia is divided into 25 provinces including the autonomous municipality.. hun sen has opposed extensive trials or investigations of former khmer rouge officials.. cambodia's tourist souvenir industry employs a lot of people around the main places of interest.. cambodia was once one of the most landmined countries in the world.. lack of a clear distinction between the courts and the executive branch of government also makes for a deep politicisation of the judicial system.. french influence on cambodian cuisine includes the cambodian red curry with toasted baguette bread.. the government plans to increase the quality of healthcare in the country by raising awareness of hiv/aids, malaria, and other diseases.. since the 2017 crackdowns on political dissent and free press, cambodia has been described as a de facto one-party state.. land has been confiscated from hundreds of thousands of cambodians over more than a decade for the purpose of self-enrichment and maintaining power of various groups of special interests.. based on the classical indian solar calendar and theravada buddhism, the cambodian new year is a major holiday that takes place in april.. education main article: education in cambodia the ministry of education, youth and sports is responsible for establishing national policies and guidelines for education in cambodia.. the 1997 coup d'état consolidated power under prime minister hun sen and the cambodian people's party .. the programme engages with workers, employers, and governments to improve working conditions and boost the competitiveness of the garment industry.. western sports such as basketball, volleyball, bodybuilding, field hockey, rugby union, golf, and baseball are gaining popularity.. scholar george coedes refers to a 10th-century inscription of a cambodian dynastic legend in which the hermit kambu swayambhuva and the celestial nymph mera unite and establish the cambodian solar royal dynasty , that begins with the chenla ruler srutavarman and his son sreshthavarman.. pol pot was determined to keep his power and disenfranchise any enemies or potential threats, and thus increased his violent and aggressive actions against his people.. recent artistic figures include singers sinn sisamouth and ros serey sothea , who introduced new musical styles to the country.. donors pledged $504 million to the country in 2004, while the asian development bank alone has provided $850 million in loans, grants, and technical assistance.. khmer rouge regime main articles: democratic kampuchea and khmer rouge rooms of the tuol sleng genocide museum contain thousands of photos taken by the khmer rouge of their victims.. hun sen remains the de facto ruler of cambodia through his continued leadership of the cambodian people's party.. after the 2013 cambodian general election, allegations of voter fraud from opposition party cambodia national rescue party led to widespread anti-government protests that continued into the following year.. the principal commercial crop is rubber.. cambodia signed the un treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons.. probably the most popular dine out dish, kuyteav, is a pork broth rice noodle soup with fried garlic, scallions, green onions that may also contain various toppings such as beef balls, shrimp, pork liver or lettuce.. choeung ek, a known site of mass grave for genocide victims during the khmer rouge era estimates as to how many people were killed by the khmer rouge regime range from approximately 1 to 3 million; a cited figure is 2 million .. etymology main article: names of cambodia the kingdom of cambodia is the official english name of the country.. "cyclo" or cycle rickshaws were popular in 1990s but are increasingly replaced by remorques and rickshaws imported from india.. and many original master tapes from the period were lost or destroyed.. volleyball is by far the most popular sport in the country.. every year, cambodians visit pagodas across the country to mark the pchum ben .. in addition to political oppression, the cambodian government has been accused of corruption in the sale of vast areas of land to foreign investors resulting in the eviction of thousands of villagers as well as taking bribes in exchange for grants to exploit cambodia's oil wealth and mineral resources.. southwest monsoons blow inland bringing moisture-laden winds from the gulf of thailand and indian ocean from may to october.. te krolap is a strong tea, made by putting water and a mass of tea leaves into a small glass, placing a saucer on top, and turning the whole thing upside down to brew.. peace efforts began in paris in 1989 under the state of cambodia, culminating 2 years later in october 1991 in a paris comprehensive peace settlement.. the 2010 anti-corruption law provided no protection to whistle-blowers, and whistle-blowers can be jailed for up to 6 months if they report corruption that cannot be proven.. main article: religion in cambodia theravada buddhism is the official religion of cambodia, practised by more than 95 per cent of the population with an estimated 4,392 monastery temples throughout the country.. geography main article: geography of cambodia geographic map of cambodia regional map of cambodia cambodia has an area of 181,035 square kilometres and lies entirely within the tropics, between latitudes 10° and 15°n, and longitudes 102° and 108°e.. excavations in its lower layers produced a series of radiocarbon dates around 6000 bc.. on 18 august 2019, prime minister hun sen signed a directive banning the finance ministry from issuing new online gambling licenses, while operators currently holding online licenses would only be allowed to continue operating until those licenses expire.. the election was won by funcinpec led by sihanouk's son ranariddh in a hung parliament.. after the 1962 population census was conducted, cambodia's civil conflicts and instability lead to a 36-year-long gap before the country could have another official census in 1998. as of 2010, half of the cambodian population is younger than 22 years old.. the cambodian ministry of culture and fine arts is responsible for promoting and developing cambodian culture.. the indianised kingdom facilitated the spread of first hinduism and then buddhism to southeast asia and undertook religious infrastructural projects throughout the region.. it also had a severe economic impact, with the tourism industry particularly affected due to international travel restrictions.. the dry season lasts from november to april when temperatures can rise up to 40 °c around april.. one of the largest challenges facing cambodia is still the fact that the older population often lacks education, particularly in the countryside, which suffers from a lack of basic infrastructure.. cuisine main article: cuisine of cambodia clockwise from top left: saraman curry ; prahok k'tis; num banhchok; and samlor kako rice is the staple grain, as in other southeast asian countries.. in the 1980s, keo surath, and others carried on the legacy of the classic singers, often remaking their popular songs.. its minority groups include chams , vietnamese and chinese .. "the law was proposed at a time when workers have been staging sustained protests in factories and in the streets demanding wage increases and improvements in their working conditions".. the refusal of vietnam to withdraw from cambodia led to economic sanctions.. military main article: royal cambodian armed forces royal cambodian army officers marching the royal cambodian army, royal cambodian navy, royal cambodian air force and royal gendarmerie collectively form the royal cambodian armed forces, under the command of the ministry of national defence, presided over by the prime minister of cambodia.. this consisted of the khmer rouge, a royalist faction led by sihanouk, and the khmer people's national liberation front.. the term cambodia was already in use in europe as early as 1524, since antonio pigafetta cites it in his work relazione del primo viaggio intorno al mondo as camogia.. politics main articles: politics of cambodia and list of political parties in cambodia government norodom sihamoni, king of cambodia national politics in cambodia take place within the framework of the nation's constitution of 1993. the government is a constitutional monarchy operated as a parliamentary representative democracy.. the cham in cambodia number under a million and often maintain separate villages in the southeast of the country.. this cliff marks the southern limit of the dângrêk mountains.. in the 2010s, the cambodian government and educational system has increased its involvement and co-operation with both national and international environmental groups.. it is a member of the asian development bank , asean, and joined the wto in 2004. in 2005 cambodia attended the inaugural east asia summit in malaysia..